Alright everyone, welcome back to Encyclopedia
Hermetica part 46; last time we were together, we talked about hell – or at least various
manifestations of the underworld according to various ancient and medieval Mediterranean
cultures. Today were going to tackling the flipside
of this and discussing heaven – graduating from the halls of Amenti, crossing the razor-thin
rainbow road, or confirming one’s name in the Book of Life before entering the pearly
gates beyond the crystal sea… alright, well maybe not those instances specifically, but
you can consider this lecture part of a miniseries within the Encyclopedia Hermetica that is
not exactly chronologically ordered or geographically restrained, and is more or less rambling concerned
with the phenomena of “heaven” and “hell” (or as much less loaded terms, “the celestial
world” versus the “chthonic” worlds.) I am not talking about a place where you go
when you die, although there’s always something to be said about that too; no, I’m generally
talking about states of mind, or conditions of consciousness. You can live in the Kingdom of Heaven, which
is ordered and harmonious – in line with the dao of the universe, if you will; or you
can rebel against nature, and suffer among the Kingdom of the Damned. Now primitive notions of heaven were, like
most abstract metaphysical concepts, rooted in physical concepts first, then extrapolated
into abstract concepts with time. The two major contributing images to our conceptions
of heaven were first the Mountain, or “the High Places” as they’re called in the
Bible – places such as Mount Sinai, Mount Zion, Mount Ida, Mount Olympos, Mount Nysa,
and so forth where gods and goddesses tend to live; and the second informing image is
that great and orderly vault above us  filled with luminous bodies… the sun, the
stars, the moon in all their clockwork glory. There were other high places, such as the
tops or trees, poles, or man-made towers, but these were more popular among people who
didn’t live in the immediate vicinity of mountains. The story of the Tower of Babel is an example
of this kind of priestly artifice – trying to literally reach the gods, or at least be
closer to them, by climbing into the physical sky. Now obviously these two images were inseparable
from one another in generating our imagery of heaven: first off, these places are set
apart and untouchable (that’s literally the meaning behind the word Sacred, “set
apart”). Mountains were dangerous places to be, especially
in a time before health insurance. This idea of hiking up a mountain to find
yourself? It didn’t really exist back then, or at
least it was extremely rare. This ties into our whole changing conceptions
of what ‘Nature’ is (and honestly, nature was not really perceived as our friend until
the works of the 19th century American Transcendentalists convinced us there was something sublime rather
than murderous about nature walks and camping trips). It was exceedingly rare for someone to climb
a mountain, and so it was usually for literary, spiritual, or religious reasons. There’s actually a popular greek myth, and
it’s killing me that I can’t remember the figure’s name to get the end of the
story, but in any case, he was a shepherd who loses one of his flock while grazing his
herds on the slopes of mount Olympos. Well, like the parable of the lost sheep,
what does a shepherd do when 1 of his 99 sheep wanders off? He goes to get it. So he starts his climb up the mountain, and
here we get a long montage of the seasons changing as our friend climbs and climbs this
mountain. Valleys turn into steep rocky slopes, which
give way to sheer walls, but on he climbs, hearing his animal echoing off in the distance
just out of reach. Soon enough he reaches a wall of clouds, which
he enters reluctantly. Climbing on through the mist for what seemed
like days. He finally breaks through the ring of clouds
girting the peak of the mountain, and finds himself at the foot of a titanic gold and
marble palace, where he espied the gods reclining on their couches in indifference, drinking
their nectar and eating their ambrosia. Well, I actually forget how this story ends,
but I’m moreso using it to illustrate a point, and I’m sure the parallels with the
story of Moses and the Burning Bush are leaping out at you as well. The gods are in the wilderness. They are where YOU are not. That’s the top of the Holy Mountain, and
that’s where man goes to find heaven. This whole physical-literal, spiritual-allegorical
thing bleeds into one another – they are the One Great Thing. It may have been the sheer physical magnitude
– the relative enormity of both mountain and sky – which first brought man’s attention
toward the idea of a hierarchy of internal states. The underworld was a place of death and disorder,
and was made analogous with the chaos, uncertainty and fear that overtook men; the world above,
however, was a place of luminous brilliance, endless depth, and immutable order, and so
it served as a surface upon which to map the very concepts of “nobility”, “loftiness”,
“order”, “balance”, and so forth. “Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done, on
earth, as it is in heaven”. I don’t know if this is just something that’s
engrained in us from apehood, that the tallest tree is the best tree, or if it has to do
with size (that the big monkey gets all the ladies) – but somewhere along the line,
the idea of size became equated with good, and so mountains and skys (the two biggest
things) became interconnected with power language, and the lowly, claustrophobic netherworld
was interconnected with the language of weakness. Now let’s not forget that the Greeks had
a very clearly delineated hierarchy in among their gods. At the top of Homer’s Golden Chain, at the
top of windswept Olympos ruled a mighty Sky-God – Zeus or Jupiter (Dyaus Pitar – the Shining
Father, or the Bright Father) who represented the inner blue vault of the heavens, all the
weather therein, and by extension, cosmic justice. He was the ultimate Patriarch, if you were
a Feminist you’d say he embodies the Patriarchy itself! But notice how it is the god of heaven, not
the god of the gloomy underworld, or of the raging sea, or even of the wide land, that
stands supreme over all the gods. And before Zeus, it had been Saturn/Kronos
– also a Sky-God – and before him, Ouranos (whose name is etymologically related to rain
water, or even our word Urine). I like to think of these as layers of orderliness
in the cosmos: the outer black canvas of the night, the one with stars studded in it, that’s
Ouranos. This great gaping vastness was broken up (or
castrated) by Time (Kronos/Saturn), who separated the heavens and the earth (if you will), and
then Zeus overthrows him, becoming the ruler of the cosmos, which he walls in with a blue
dome like a king walling in his jurisdiction. In any case, what I’m trying to get at is
that the earliest notions of what constituted heaven were animistic ones. They were about taking the subjective phenomenon
that is the physical world around them, and mapping it with “spirit” – that is,
to permeate the mountains, trees, and stars with “mind stuff” – to reach out with
the mind and touch those things, to name them, and thereby to interact with them. I can’t say exactly when this happened,
but it must have happened at a very early period in human development (and obviously
happened very differently from one place to another), but from a very early period, shaman
(or just regular folks in ecstatic trances) were also exploring inner-space, or the meta-terrestrial
realms of forms within, their so-called spirit world, or world of the ancestors, then relating
these experiences by using words which everyone could relate to. The bird became the symbol of heavenly ascent,
the serpent of chthonic descent. When you feel exalted, when the ground dissolves
beneath your feet and your mind is going to be pulled out of your body from the very top
of your head – how will you relate that to the tribe? Well, you sing them a song and tell them it
was like climbing a mountain, or like a flying bird. Maybe a more sophisticated answer is that
you were among the stars, communing with the very planets themselves. Now when I tell you I saw the great jewelled
purple Chrysanthemum spinning before me, refracting off light like a violent machine, and then
opening its gaping maw to create a window into new dreams… it’s because I definitely
saw something, and that something is ineffable, but I’ll try anyhow using the closest possible
analogy to this physical world – and I think all of us can relate to ‘purple flowers,’
‘machines,’ ‘mouths,’ ‘windows,’ and ‘dreams.’ I don’t actually have any other anchors
in my maps of meaning to help clarify what it is that I saw. I might tell you that once upon a time I met
the Goddess… but truth be told, she didn’t take the form of a literal woman, she was
just a warm feminine orange glow that overtook my field of vision, and that warm orange glow
had along with it all the warmth and love I’d received from my mother as a child,
but condensed into a disembodied ball of light on the back of my eyelids. Now the problem with all this is that it doesn’t
really mean anything – and it doesn’t help any of you in any way. So that’s when everyone started applying
meta-glosses to other people’s visions. Well read some Ezekiel later, but I’ll tell
you now, I don’t think (as many biblical scholars think) that Ezekiel wrote his vision
of the chariot to mean anything intrinsically, in the same way that the word “Hallelujah”
has no intrinsic meaning. I think the meaning was mapped over it at
a later date, probably by an entirely different author (or authors)! I think prophets were people who had visions
and some wrote down what they saw – later interpreters are then the ones who figured
out what these visions meant. The oracle at Delphi worked this way: the
oracle goes on the inner journey, brings back a few words, then the interpreter explains
to the querent what the vision actually meant. Just like the heavens themselves were thought
of as being layered and stratified, our approach to someone else’s mystical experience is
layered and stratified. There is a great multitude of ways of interpretation,
some arguably more valuable than others, but there are many nonetheless. But I think when we talk about quote-unquote
“heaven”, we need to follow this general chronological schema of 1) there is a physical
substrate (we take in images of rocks, mountains, trees, orderly stars and planets, etc.); 2)
there is an altogether different “mental” substrate which reveals itself in trance or
in dream, detached from physical phenomena, which we can provisionally call non-physical
(here all the images taken in from the physical world get jumbled up with pure form and formlessness
and then experienced first-hand in the mind’s eye); then 3) there’s an interpretive dimension,
once you’re back from your journey, reconstructing what you went through, where the things you
saw have to be anchored to concepts in the quote-unquote “real world” (and unfortunately,
this process of remembering and re-mapping things with words alters your memory of the
event). Now there are far more layers of interpretation,
in fact I would say there’s a kind of never-ending fractal of interpretations, but this will
do for our purposes. What we’re going to be exploring is literature
about these kinds of experience throughout time: we don’t have first-hand access to
Dante’s Paradiso, we’re not Dante; but at the very least, we can have our own experiences
of this type, we can then relate to the literary by-product of Dante’s experiences (or Enoch’s
or Paul’s or whatever), and shape our interpretations in accordance with our own personal experience. Ultimately, you can never reach into someone
else’s head and experience their qualia… experience their experience. But we can have our own experiences, acknowledge
that we’re all wired up somewhat similarly on account of our shared biology, and use
that as one of many interpretive lenses. In my opinion, there are way too many people
who treat these sorts of works purely literally or perhaps allegorically, but I don’t think
it does justice to most of our authors. Just a side on this idea of fractal interpretations:
what I meant by it was this: you can interpret a text in an infinite number of ways – you
can start by interpreting a single word from it, or you can broaden your parameters to
include an analysis of two words, or three, or five, or of a single sentence, or of a
whole paragraph, or of a whole chapter or book, or author, or literary tradition – there’s
an infinite way to interpret a text, and some people say there is a pragmatic hierarchy
of ways to interpret the world, and others say there isn’t, and it’s just one big
power game (this is actually how post-modernism was born, but I’m not going to go there
here). In more traditional divisions of interpretive
levels, we get things like the seven layers of interpretation for the Koran, or the four
layers of interpretation which the Jews use for the Torah, there’s the Peshat (פְּשָׁט‎)
which means the “surface” or the literal interpretation of a text. The Remez (רֶמֶז‎), which are "hints"
to the deep (that is, allegorical: hidden or symbolic) meaning beyond just the literal
sense. There’s the Derash (דְּרַשׁ‎) — from
the Hebrew word meaning "to inquire" (or "to seek") — this is the comparative (or midrashic)
meaning, as it occurs in similar other occurrences (it’s the exercise of a kind of comparative
literature). Then Sod (סוֹד‎) (O as in sew), is the
"secret" esoteric or mystical meaning, as given through inspiration or revelation. Then of course we’ve got things like all
the blasted but useful academic schools of interpretation: constructivism, structuralism,
Marxist, feminist, post-colonial, Freudian, and so on and so forth ad nauseam. I’m going to be doing something a little
different here, because I have the freedom to do so. Now, if we’re going to be talking about
literature specifically, it really limits how far back we can go. I was wracking my mind trying to think of
what the oldest known “ascent” or anabasis narrative I could find was: so I went to Gilgamesh
first, and I found the story of Utnapishtim (Sumerian Noah), which I think is a little
forced to call an anabasis myth – then I looked at Gilgamesh and his Herb of Immortality
as well, but that’s a Katabasis motif. So here I am thinking “well, there’s got
to be some sort of antediluvian anabasis story I can pull up” – and sure enough, I figured
I’d start out with Enoch. Now we need to realize that the stories of
Enoch were written down at a fairly late period in history (4th century BC at the earliest),
but they are ultimately representative of a long line of oral traditions that stretch
back into god-knows-when. Later, a post-rabbinical literary movement
called “Hehkalot literature” (from the Hebrew word for Palaces – as in Palaces
of Heaven), would evolve out of this tradition of writing (this genre overlaps with mystical
Merkabah literature, as we’ll see in Ezekiel), so it’s safe to say that Enoch is the antediluvian
Hebrew culture-hero around whom the whole discourse of mystical ascension revolved (in
so far as the Jews are concerned). The Dead Sea Scroll sect at Qumran was also
very interested in Enoch and angelology and all that good stuff... So let’s start with him… and no, I won’t
be reading the whole book of Enoch (or even part of it). Now as most of you already know, the first
part of the Book of Enoch describes the fall of the Watchers – this is the Hebrew version
of the Anunnaki/Apkallu myths, these are basically fallen angels (disembodied intelligences,
or pagan gods) who come into the daughters of men and father the Nephilim, a.k.a. the
Shemsu-Hor or “the Giants.” Some of these Watchers share their names with
the later Solominic Demons in goetic magic, some of them sound eerily similar to the planetary
archons, and so there is no shortage of theories, conspiracy or otherwise, surrounding this
mythical event – it’s a real hotbed for the ancient alien folks – but this is not
what we’re after. What we want to look at is the remainder of
the book and how it describes Enoch's visits to heaven in the form of what you could call
visionary astral travel. Now one of these books is quite a marvel,
the astronomical book, as it contains detailed prose descriptions of the movement of the
celestial bodies and of the firmament itself. This sort of thing is related as a revelation
to Enoch during his sojourn into Heaven guided by the hand of the Archangel Uriel. This sort of plays out like one of the trippier
episodes of Adventure Time. In it we get a full description of a Solar
calendar (one which, incidentally, would be taken up by the Dead Sea sect). The year was composed from 364 days, divided
in four equal seasons with ninety-one days each. Each season was composed of three equal months
of thirty days, plus an extra day at the end of the third month. The whole year was thus exactly fifty-two
weeks, and every calendar day occurred always on the same day of the week. Each year and each season started always on
Wednesday, which was the fourth day of the creation narrated in Genesis, the day when
the lights in the sky, the seasons, the days and the years were created. Now… already I’m going to stop myself
here: this is the kind of thing people are talking about when they say “see – these
works aren’t the products of ecstatic experiences - you can’t just come up with this stuff
in ecstatic psycho-babble – this is science!” complaining that you can’t just go into
a trance, right stuff down, and then have it come out making any sense, or offering
any meaning to anyone. Well… this is why I talked about layers
of interpretation first. I don’t actually believe that someone (let
alone Enoch) had a vision and downloaded all this information, wrote it down in one go,
and that was that. I think one person had the visions, other
people generated a visionary literature tradition (then ascribed it to the first guy), then
someone came along at a later date and used the literary tradition or myth to elaborate
their “scientific” or “natural philosophical” observations. It’s been postulated that every book in
First Enoch was written by a different author, and doubtless each of these were edited by
a number of hands, so I have no problems with this at all, but I won’t deny that someone,
or some group, at some point had a series of vision and talked about them before they
were elaborated on in text. What the visionary writer who put together
the astronomical book was trying to impart was a sense of completion, or fullness of
wisdom – what the Picatrix would later call the “Perfect” or “Complete” nature,
and there was no better way to convey this sense of divine omniscience, than by relating
in writing how the universe ostensibly works: we’ve got a description of [72] The Sun,
[73] The Moon and its Phases, [74] The Lunar Year, [76] The Twelve Winds and their Portals,
[77] The Four Quarters of the World: the Seven Mountains, the Seven Rivers, Seven Great Islands
(Seven being the number of completion), [78] the Waxing and Waning of the Moon, [80.1]
the Recapitulation of several of the Laws, [80.2–8] the Perversion of Nature and the
heavenly Bodies due to the Fall of Man, [81] The Heavenly Tablets and the Mission of Enoch,
and finally, at line 82, the charge given to Enoch: the four Intercalary days: the Stars
which lead the Seasons and the Months. So there we have it – some people made observations
of the physical world, some had mystical experience, some wrote about the qualia of their mystical
experiences, and some aligned their narratives with the natural philosophy du jour – and
bam! A classic example of celestial ascent literature
– it’s the meeting place between scientific observation (digging deep to find Objectivity),
and spiritual observation (digging deep to explore subjectivity). We’ll see something similar, but from a
Greco-Roman perspective, in Scipio’s Dream (written by Cicero). That’s not how they all turn out… but
it is how many do. Mystical experiences are like flexible canvases
upon which lots of cultural data can be hinged. It’s not a failed attempt at science, it’s
augmented hyper-reality... or maybe even “science fiction” in the sense that it is the collected
body of a people’s wisdom (its ‘scientia’) and it is being framed in a cosmographical
narrative, a work of ‘fiction’ (not in the sense that it’s fake, but that it is
made, or composed – fiction comes from the latin verb “facere” “to do/to make”). In any case, I will let you go through the
book on your own – there are plenty of audiobook versions of it floating around if you’d
rather listen to it – but I think you can’t get the full picture of what I’m trying
to explain without a good sense of what goes on in there. This does, however, give me a springboard
to get into some reading… speaking of “Merkabah’ lit, I think it’s fitting here to give a
reading from the Book of Ezekiel, but first a word about its composition. So Ezekiel was a Hebrew prophet, he is revered
by all Judeo-Christian monotheistic religions as such – he supposedly lived during the
late 7th, early 6th centuries BC, where Tel Aviv is now, and all this during the time
of the Babylonian captivity. Now here’s not the place to discuss who
actually wrote the works attributed to Ezekiel, who edited them, and when… I’d rather stick to the more poetic and
mystical dimensions of his text than grind away at its historicity. We’ve talked about the world within which
the prophets lived at a fairly early point in the lecture series, so let’s let the
text speak for itself. And so here’s where it starts, right in
medias res, right in the juicy bits: Ezekiel 1New King James Version (NKJV)
Ezekiel’s Vision of God 1 Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year,
in the fourth month, on the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the
River Chebar, that the heavens were opened and I saw visions[a] of God. 2 On the fifth day of the month, which was
in the fifth year of King Jehoiachin’s captivity, 3 the word of the LORD came expressly to Ezekiel
the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans[b] by the River Chebar; and
the hand of the LORD was upon him there. 4 Then I looked, and behold, a whirlwind was
coming out of the north, a great cloud with raging fire engulfing itself; and brightness
was all around it and radiating out of its midst like the color of amber, out of the
midst of the fire. 5 Also from within it came the likeness of
four living creatures. And this was their appearance: they had the
likeness of a man. 6 Each one had four faces, and each one had
four wings. 7 Their legs were straight, and the soles
of their feet were like the soles of calves’ feet. They sparkled like the color of burnished
bronze. 8 The hands of a man were under their wings
on their four sides; and each of the four had faces and wings. 9 Their wings touched one another. The creatures did not turn when they went,
but each one went straight forward. 10 As for the likeness of their faces, each
had the face of a man; each of the four had the face of a lion on the right side, each
of the four had the face of an ox on the left side, and each of the four had the face of
an eagle. 11 Thus were their faces. Their wings stretched upward; two wings of
each one touched one another, and two covered their bodies. 12 And each one went straight forward; they
went wherever the spirit wanted to go, and they did not turn when they went. 13 As for the likeness of the living creatures,
their appearance was like burning coals of fire, like the appearance of torches going
back and forth among the living creatures. The fire was bright, and out of the fire went
lightning. 14 And the living creatures ran back and forth,
in appearance like a flash of lightning. 15 Now as I looked at the living creatures,
behold, a wheel was on the earth beside each living creature with its four faces. 16 The appearance of the wheels and their
workings was like the color of beryl, and all four had the same likeness. The appearance of their workings was, as it
were, a wheel in the middle of a wheel. 17 When they moved, they went toward any one
of four directions; they did not turn aside when they went. 18 As for their rims, they were so high they
were awesome; and their rims were full of eyes, all around the four of them. 19 When the living creatures went, the wheels
went beside them; and when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels
were lifted up. 20 Wherever the spirit wanted to go, they
went, because there the spirit went; and the wheels were lifted together with them, for
the spirit of the living creatures[c] was in the wheels. 21 When those went, these went; when those
stood, these stood; and when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted
up together with them, for the spirit of the living creatures[d] was in the wheels. 22 The likeness of the firmament above the
heads of the living creatures[e] was like the color of an awesome crystal, stretched
out over their heads. 23 And under the firmament their wings spread
out straight, one toward another. Each one had two which covered one side, and
each one had two which covered the other side of the body. 24 When they went, I heard the noise of their
wings, like the noise of many waters, like the voice of the Almighty, a tumult like the
noise of an army; and when they stood still, they let down their wings. 25 A voice came from above the firmament that
was over their heads; whenever they stood, they let down their wings. 26 And above the firmament over their heads
was the likeness of a throne, in appearance like a sapphire stone; on the likeness of
the throne was a likeness with the appearance of a man high above it. 27 Also from the appearance of His waist and
upward I saw, as it were, the color of amber with the appearance of fire all around within
it; and from the appearance of His waist and downward I saw, as it were, the appearance
of fire with brightness all around. 28 Like the appearance of a rainbow in a cloud
on a rainy day, so was the appearance of the brightness all around it. This was the appearance of the likeness of
the glory of the LORD. Alright, let’s stop there. Now there are as many interpretations to this
text as there are hairs on your head, but what I’d like to do here is to highlight
the qualia as best I can at the expense of the millions of posited meanings. Anyone who’s had a mystical, near death,
out-of-body-experience or whatever, will immediately read these words and say “oooh, I get it! I’ve been there! I know exactly what he’s trying to get at!”
whereas all the people who haven’t had those experiences will grope in the dark, trying
to attribute meaning to the vision like a Rorschach blot. I’d like to think there’s a large degree
of overlap between the esoteric and the exoteric crowd, but it hasn’t been my personal experience. First thing we get is a great fiery whirlwind,
coloured like amber, coming out of the north. OK, well right away from that – what I can
tell you he’s trying to get at is the confounding of all categories – the great synaesthesia
which immediately precedes the experience. We’ve got wind, which is normally a thing
you feel with your sense of touch, but here it is visible – it is made of fire, of hot
dancing light – and it is likened to the visual qualities of a solid stone: of amber. How can you see wind? How does it have the colour of a solid object? We’ve got this elemental upheaval when God
rolls out – everything that is clearly distinguished in categories in the “real world” is just
collapsed into one great sensory mess. This is something I have felt many times,
this is something I assume most of you have felt – this is actually an experience that
can be experienced. Yes, it can be mapped with further meaning,
it can be stripped of its subjective dimension and made into pure allegory, but this robs
us of a critical portion of mankind’s spiritual life, which is the first hand experience of
“The One” through the Many. We have five senses, but in these states of
heightened mental acuity, all these all bleed into one “common sense” (which feels like
it’s right in the center of your skull). Next we have the emergence of this chimerical,
zoomorphic figures coming out of the mix – again, these have countless interpretations, I know
Christians love to imagine these as the four gospel writers – but this is all part of
a later mapping process. Again, if we want to go back to talking about
the qualia of a mystical experience, we need to get rid of all these rigid words. The map is not the territory. If you go and look at all these various artists’
interpretations of what Ezekiel saw, they’re all static – they aren’t churning and
amorphous, suggestive of vague, ever-changing forms and figures rather than clearly delineated
characters. When I imagine this scene, I think a dreamy
nebulousness, within which all opposites are reconciled: man and beast, man and machine,
and of course, man and God. We really overemphasize the literal interpretations:
who was the lion, who was the eagle (“who or what do they represent), and so on and
so forth, but this comes at the expense of trying to imagine the world as Ezekiel saw
it, with the collapse or confoundment of all the mental categories at work. Next we have a description of these beings,
and how akin to fire and lightning they were. Well, when you’re in this state of mind
and your head is filled with hypnogogic phosphorescence, patterned bright lights and violent shapes,
and that’s the nearest thing you can anchor it to: fire and lightning, amorphous visions
of violent dancing light. I mean, what other words could he have used!? He didn’t have terms like phosphenes and
hypnogogia – there was no way to taxonomize the experience, except in terms relatable
to the common man. Fire and lightning also conveys the fear! Fire and lightning were the most destructive
forces in the ancient world, they elicited awe, and wonder, and fear, and everything
else that the vision of a god would elicit (Horace, the Latin poet, talked about the
Sublime as a “Thunderclap”). Alright, next we have what I like to call
“wheels within wheels within wheels within weird.” I’ve seen these… they’re like fractal
cycles behind closed eyelids – they create a kind of inner clockwork pattern (see, again,
I have words I can use like “clockwork” which Ezekiel most certainly did not). They’re said to look like beryl… in other
words, the wheels are colourful, translucent, and they refract light like a crystal. This is what the visionary experience looks
like… it’s like being inside of a spinning jewel, though that’s only a visual descriptor. He didn’t literally see a chariot, the chariot
is just the closest thing he could allude to in comparison. The wheel is one of the most ancient divine
symbols, and it’s because it spins in cycles, which is ostensibly what every other thing
is doing: sun, moon, crops, seasons, life and death, etc. and these sorts of patterns,
once internalized, become a very pronounced theme during the mystical experiences. It’s no coincidence that the Samsara of
the Hindu is also conceived of as a wheel, and all those beautiful mandalas are attempts
to capture that transcendent beauty into little pictures of the whole cosmos, just before
confounding all the coloured sands into one undifferentiated primordial substance. Now another detail on these wheels is something
I think the visionary artist Alex Grey often captures exceedingly well (and now it’s
become a sort of sine-qua-nonof the style), and that’s that the rims of the wheels are
covered in eyes. There’s something very psychedelic about
the eye that I can’t quite put a finger on, but it’s definitely there. Ultimately, I think it symbolizes pure awareness. We of the west have a tendency to hierarchize
our senses, with taste at the bottom and sight at the top – if we didn’t do that (thanks
to Plato), maybe our visionary art would have millions of ears and tongues too, but for
the most part, awareness is symbolized by the eye – and infinite awareness is symbolized
by infinite eyes. This leads me to think of an anecdote… whenever
I find myself in these experiences (which last anywhere from 5-12 hours depending on
a number of factors), the thing that creeps me out the most is at the end of the night
when I have to take out my contact lenses. There’s nothing weirder than using your
finger to poke your literal eyeball while you’re in that state… – that preciously
fragile and tiny gateway to all the pure light in the world, when you actually cause the
light to bend from the light pressure you’re applying directly to your eye – it makes
you highly aware that the inside of you and the outside of you are actually one contiguous
thing, and unless you’re some kind of deeply enlightened Yogi who lives in that state of
mind at all times, it’s always startling and very unsettling. It makes you ask yourself: who is the I behind
the seer, the hearer, the toucher, the smeller, or the taster, you could lose all of these
and still be conscious, but who or what would be left behind? Pure awareness. That’s what these eyes are all about. Alright, now one of my favourite parts as
we’re getting closer and closer to the heart of the vision – the peak of the holy mountain,
if you will. I’ll read this line again slowly: “The
likeness of the firmament above the heads of the living creatures[e] was like the color
of an awesome crystal, stretched out over their heads.” So the “likeness of the firmament” – that
is “the image” or “the reflection” of the heavenly vault (it’s this kind of
oblique modality of vision) – it’s this infinite thing, and it’s being condensed
just above the head of these four chimeras, as if sitting atop of a chariot, and it’s
described with the colour of crystal… which has no colour at all, except maybe iridescence,
which is both all the colours and none of them at the same time. Again, what we’re getting is this sense
of everything and nothing, the ultimate mysterium conjunctionis, the reconciliation of all paradox. And it was the sky itself – the firmament. He’s experiencing the mysterium tremendum
et fascinans – and he’s just scraping by in giving us his best words to describe
something that cannot be described, and that’s why it comes out sounding like madness. As you asymptotically approach the One, there
are fewer and fewer things to say, and what you can say usually makes little sense. Then, “above the firmament over their heads”
that is, above the sky itself – we’re getting into metaphysical territory here,
above and beyond this earthly realm – into the inter-worlds, if you will, there appeared
the likeness – the image – of a throne – that great symbol of absolute authority,
shining like a sapphire – that is, radiating a scintillating blue light. Then over the likeness of the throne was “a
likeness with the appearance of a man high above it” – now look at how carefully
oblique that is… it’s the appearance, of an image, of a man. It doesn’t say just “a man” – it’s
the reflection, of a reflection, of a man, and he’s shrouded in fire – in dancing,
terrifying light. Then it says this “Like the appearance of
a rainbow in a cloud on a rainy day, so was the appearance of the brightness all around
it.” So it’s iridescent. Lots of artists literally put rainbows around
God, but I think there’s a difference between literal rainbows and “like the appearance
of a rainbow.” Hmmmm… now where else have we experienced
this? Ezekiel writes “This was the appearance
of the likeness of the glory of the LORD.” This was the image, of the image, of the KABOD
of the Lord. The image, of the image, of the gravity or
weightiness of the One (that’s what KABOD or Glory actually means). And here I am telling you through an image,
about the image of an image of an image about the Glory of the One. Well no wonder so much resolution is lost
along the way, like a game of telephone gone afoul. Now if that isn’t a description of a psychedelic
state, that is a state of mind-manifestation, I don’t know what is. If you’ve personally had one or many of
these experiences, you can recognize it in an instant. If you’ve never had any kinds of visions
like these, then you’re going to be more interested in everything that comes after
this portion of text – that is, the practical application of the prophecy to the “real
world” (which I don’t want to dismiss, but I’m not getting into it here) – what
there needs to be, is someone to say at least something about the literary descriptions
of heaven, of the Chariots, and the Glory of God, and without trivializing them, linking
them to the states of mind that can be achieved through extreme fasting, meditation, exhaustion,
drug use, etc. – these are not airy fairy literary fancies or daydreams! These are literally experiences people can
(and still do) actually go through and from which they take away deep meaning and significance
to use in their daily lives. That’s really what I want to say – that
these anabasis stories we’ll be exploring… these are real to a great extent, or at least
indicative of an event that the author perceived as REALER THAN REAL. I don’t want to trivialize the role and
impact these sorts of experiences have had on individuals, then by extension on families
and tribes, on nations, and by extent upon the whole world. When Paul says “he knew a guy” who was
swept up into the third heaven, whether in his body or out of it, let’s take his word
for it! It evidently meant something to him! I’m not saying that everyone who apparently
gets swept up into heaven is an infallible demigod and we should follow all their commands
– I’m just trying to point out that history is punctuated by a great number of men and
women who have mystical experiences, and these are then reinterpreted through a specific
cultural lens, especially when it comes to literature, and these ideas have massive ramifications. I don’t want to say they came from “beyond”
– because that would trivialize the fact that they came from within the human heart,
but what I DO want to say is that this “beyond” lies too within the human heart. By the way, if you’re the sceptical type
and think I’m being wishy-washy with terms like mystical experience and so forth, that’s
fine, but know that even science confirms its existence as a phenomenon – I believe
it’s the work of Roland Griffiths at John Hopkins University who’s compiling together
the studies to provide a standardized definition for a thing that has no standardized qualia. In any case, this lecture is more so preaching
to the choir – if you’ve never had the experience, there’s not much I can say to
convince you it’s a real thing and not exclusively the weapon of a charlatan. But anyhow there’s plenty more to be said
about Ezekiel and the prophets, but I’m going to move on because there’s a lot of
ground to cover. In fact I think I’m only going to have time
to look at one more text briefly before calling it a day, but we’ll resume at another time
with more texts, before eventually getting back to our more formal chronology. Now, in the spirit of throwing chronology
to the wind, I want to give an example of a mystical experience pushed through the lens
of Greco-Roman Stoic cosmology – the classic Somnium Scipionis. It was written by that great orator, that
derivative eclectic philosopher, and that root of Renaissance Humanism: Marcus Tulius
Cicero. It was modelled after the Myth of Er in Plato’s
republic (which I discussed in the last lecture), and it’s the literary description of a fictional
out-of-body experience (or dream) of the roman general Scipio Aemilianus, two years before
he’d sack the city of Carthage and burn it to the ground in 146 BC. There’s even a Mozart Opera about it, il
sogno di scipione (Scipio’s Dream) During his travels in Africa, Scipio Aemilianus
had been a guest at the court of King Massinissa, during which time he is visited by an apparition
of his dead grandfather, Scipio Africanus, the hero of the Second Punic War. He’s taken up out of his body, and finds
himself looking down upon Carthage "from a high place full of stars, bright and shining
" – so there’s that motif we were talking about at the beginning of the talk. Now I was thinking of reading you the whole
thing, but I don’t think it would be that useful to you, instead I’ll give you most
of it, with some bits edited out to make our journey through the text more concise. So while they’re floating there above the
world, Scipio’s future is foretold by his grandfather (something that happens a lot
in prophetic literature – easily done when you’re writing in the distant future of
the events being described). By the way, this text would have massive impact
on the cosmological, hermetic type works of the middle-ages, so listen carefully. Here it goes, we start with a quote from ghostly
grandfather Scipio Africanus to his living grandson Scipio Aemilianus:
3. Do you see that city, which although forced
by my arms to yield obedience to the Roman people, is reviving the recollection of the
wars of old and cannot rest in peace,"—now he was showing to me Carthage, from a place
on high, full of stars, and bright and shining—, "that city, to attack which you are now coming
almost as a private soldier? Within these two years you will destroy it
as Consul; and that title, which so far you bear as an inheritance from me, shall be won
for you by your own achievement. But when you hast razed Carthage, celebrated
a triumph, held the office of Censor, and travelled on a mission over Egypt, Syria,
Asia Minor and Greece, you will be elected Consul a second time though abroad; and you
will bring a most important war to its close, you will utterly destroy Numantia. But when you ride in your car of triumph to
the Capitol, you will find the state sorely troubled by the plotting of my own grandson. 4. Here, Africanus, you must display to the fatherland
the light of your courage, genius and wisdom. But in that time, I see the march of destiny,
so to call it, hesitating between two ways. For, when your life has completed seven times
eight full cycles of the sun; and these two numbers, each of which for a different reason
is held to be a perfect number, in the revolution of nature has fulfilled your destined sum
for you; to you alone and to your name the whole community will turn together: the Senate,
all right-thinking citizens, the allies and the Latins will fix their eyes on you; you
will be the one man on whom the community can lean for safety; and, in short, as Dictator
you must reform the constitution, if only you can escape from the unnatural violence
of your relations," " But still, Africanus, so that you may be
the readier to defend the Constitution, know this: for all who have preserved their fatherland,
furthered it, enriched it, there is in heaven a sure and allotted abode, where they may
enjoy an immortality of happiness. For nothing happens in the world more pleasing
to that supreme Deity, who governs all the universe, than those gatherings and unions
of men allied by common laws, which are called states. From this place do their rulers and guardians
set out, and to this place do they return." 6. Here, although I was greatly terrified, by
dread not so much of death as of treachery from men of my own household, I found courage
to ask if he was himself alive and my father Paulus and others, whom we regarded as dead. "Yes indeed they are alive," said he, "who
have soared away from the bonds of the body, as from a prison-house; but your life, as
it is called, is really death… 7. And, so soon as I began to be able to speak,
having choked back my tears, "Pray, tell me," said I, "most revered and best of fathers,
since this is life, as I hear Africanus say, why do I linger on earth? Why don't I hurry up and come to you there?" "It is not as you think," said he, "for unless
that God, to whom all this region that you can see belongs, has released you from the
keeping of your body, the entrance to this place cannot be open to you. For men were created subject to this law,
to keep to that globe, which you see in the centre of this region and which is called
the Earth; and to them a soul was given formed from those everlasting fires, which you mortals
call constellations and stars, that, round and spherical in form, alive with divine intelligences,
complete their orbits and circles with marvellous swiftness. So, my Publius, you and all good men must
allow the soul to remain in the keeping of the body, nor without his command, by whom
it was given to you, must you leave your human life, lest you should appear to have deserted
the post assigned to men by God. 8. But rather, my Scipio -- like your grandfather
here, like me your sire -- follow justice and natural affection, which though great
in the case of parents and kinsfolk, is greatest of all in relation to our fatherland. Such is the life that leads to heaven and
to this company of those who have now lived their lives and released from their bodies
dwell in that place which you can see,"— now that place was a circle conspicuous among
the fires of heaven by the surpassing whiteness of its glowing light—"which place you mortals,
as you have learned from the Greeks, call the Milky Way." And as I surveyed them from this point, all
the other heavenly bodies appeared to be glorious and wonderful,—now the stars were such as
we have never seen from this earth; and such was the magnitude of them all as we have never
dreamed; and the least of them all was that planet, which farthest from the heavenly sphere
and nearest to our earth, was shining with borrowed light, but the spheres of the stars
easily surpassed the earth in magnitude—already the earth itself appeared to me so small,
that it grieved me to think of our empire, with which we cover but a point, as it were,
of its surface. 9. And as I gazed upon this more intently, "Come!"
said Africanus, "how long will your mind be chained to the earth? Do you see into what regions you have come? See! the universe is linked together in nine
circles or rather spheres; one of which is that of the heavens, the outermost of all,
which embraces all the other spheres, the supreme deity, which keeps in and holds together
all the others; and to this are attached those everlasting orbits of the stars. Beneath this there lie seven, which turn backwards
with a counter revolution to the heavens; and of these spheres that star holds one,
which men on earth call Saturn's star. Next is that bright radiance, rich in hope
and healing for the sons of men, which is called Jove's star; then one fiery red and
dreaded by the world, which you call Mars; next lower down the sun holds nearly the middle
region, the leader, chief and ruler of the other lights, the mind and ordering spirit
of the universe, of such magnitude that he illumines the whole and fills it with his
light. With him Venus and Mercury keep pace as satellites
in their successive spheres; and in the lowest zone of all the moon revolves lighted up by
the rays of the sun. Now below these there is nothing more but
what is mortal and transient except those souls which the bounty of the Gods has given
to the sons of men; above the moon all is eternal. As for the earth, the ninth and central globe,
it does not move but is the lowest point, and towards it all heavy bodies tend by their
own gravity." 10. And, as I gazed on these things with amazement,
when I recovered myself: "What," I asked, "what is this sound that fills my ears, so
loud and sweet?" "This," he replied, "is that sound, which
divided in intervals, unequal, indeed, yet still exactly measured in their fixed proportion,
is produced by the impetus and movement of the spheres themselves, and blending sharp
tones with grave, therewith makes changing symphonies in unvarying harmony. For not only is it impossible that such vast
movements should sweep on in silence; but, by a natural law, the outermost parts on the
one side give a grave, and on the other a sharp sound. Wherefore the highest of all, the celestial
zone equipped with stars, whose revolution is more swift, moves with a sharp, high note;
while this one of the moon, as it is the lowest, with the deepest tone of all. For the earth, which is the ninth, remaining
motionless is ever firmly planted in one spot, clinging closely to the centre of the universe. Now the revolutions of those eight spheres,
of which two have the same power, produce seven sounds with well-marked intervals; and
this number, generally speaking, is the mystic bond of all things in the universe, And learned
men by imitating this with stringed instruments and melodies have opened for themselves the
way back to this place, even as other men of noble nature, who have followed godlike
aims in their life as men. 11. But the ears of men overpowered by the volume
of the sound have grown deaf; and you have in you no duller sense than that of hearing;
for instance, at the Catadupa as it is called, where the Nile rushes headlong from very high
mountains, the tribe which dwells near that spot, owing to the loudness of the noise has
lost the sense of hearing. But this sound of the whole universe revolving
at the utmost speed is so awful that the ears of men cannot contain it; just as you are
unable to look straight: at the sun, and your eyesight and its perceptions are overpowered
by his rays." Though marvelling at these wonders I still
kept turning my eyes at intervals towards the earth. 12. Thereupon: "I see," said Africanus, "that
you are even now regarding the abode and habitation of mankind. And if this appears to you as insignificant
as it really is, you will always look up to these celestial things and you won't worry
about those of men. For what renown among men, or what glory worth
the seeking, can you acquire? You see that on the earth only scattered and
narrow plots are inhabited; while even in the very patches, as it were, in which men
dwell, vast deserts are interspersed; and among those who live on the earth, there are
not only such breaks that no communication can pass from one set to another, but some
live in opposite zones; some on opposite sides of a zone; some even at the opposite point
of the earth to you; and from these, at any rate, you can expect no glory. 13. Moreover you see that this earth is girdled
and surrounded by certain belts, as it were; of which two, the most remote from each other,
and which rest upon the poles of the heaven at either end, have become rigid with frost;
while that one in the middle, which is also the largest, is scorched by the burning heat
of the sun. Two are habitable; of these, that one in the
South—men standing in which have their feet planted right opposite to yours—has no connection
with your race: moreover this other, in the Northern hemisphere which you inhabit, see
in how small a measure it concerns you! For all the earth, which you inhabit, being
narrow in the direction of the poles, broader East and West, is a kind of little island
surrounded by the waters of that sea, which you on earth call the Atlantic, the Great
Sea, the Ocean; and yet though it has such a grand name, see how small it really is! 14. And yet of these very lands, which are frequented
and familiar, could your name or that of any of your race have climbed beyond the summit
of the Caucasus here or crossed the waters of the Ganges there?*** Who in the other remote
regions of the rising or the setting sun or of the North or South will hear your name? Yet, leaving these aside, you can certainly
see in what a narrow field your human glory aspires to spread. Again, the very men who talk of you, how long
will they talk? 15. Why, even if those generations of men to come
should care to hand down, in succession from father to son, the glory of each one of us;
yet, still, owing to the deluges and conflagrations of the earth, which must happen periodically,
we cannot acquire a lasting, much less an eternal renown. Nay, what does it matter that mention should
be made of you by those who shall be born hereafter, when there was none among those
who were born before you? They were not fewer in number but were, at
any rate, better men; 16. the more so, as, among those very men, by
whom our name may possibly be heard, no one can secure his reputation for a single year.***
Men, to be sure, commonly measure the year by the return of the sun, that is of a single
heavenly body: but when all the constellations together shall have returned to the same point
from which they once started; and after long intervals shall have restored the order of
the whole heaven as it was before, then can that really be called the year of revolution:
in which I hardly dare to say how many generations of men are comprehended. For as at that time, when the soul of Romulus
made its way into these heavenly regions, the sun appeared to men to disappear and to
be darkened, so whenever, in the same quarter and at the same time, the sun is again eclipsed,
then, all the constellations and stars having been restored to their original position,
you can say that a year has been fulfilled. But of this year know that as yet not a twentieth
part has come round. 17. So, should you have lost hope of return to
this place, on whom great and illustrious men rest all their hopes, what then is your
human glory worth, which can hardly affect a scanty portion of a single year? Therefore, if you will choose to look aloft
and fix your gaze on this our resting-place and eternal home, nor ever enslave thyself
to the rumours of the rabble, nor stake the hope of your life on the rewards of men: virtue
must draw you by her own attraction to true glory; what others say of you, let that be
their own concern; but still they will talk. However, all that talk of theirs is both confined
within those narrow bounds, which you can see, and has never been of long continuance
in the case of any. It is buried with the men themselves, and
ends in the forgetfulness of posterity." 18. When he had ended: "For my part," said I,
"Africanus, if indeed a pathway, as it were, is open to the gates of heaven for those who
have deserved well of their native land; although I have not failed to do you honour, from my
boyhood t reading in my father's footsteps and in yours, yet now, with so great a prize
before me, much more watchfully will I strive." "Strive indeed," said he, "and be persuaded
of this: it is not you that are mortal, but this body. For you are not that which your bodily form
presents to view, but it is the mind of any man that is the man, not that figure which
can be pointed out by the finger. Know then that you are a god; since he is
a god who possesses force, feeling, memory and prescience, who directs, governs, and
moves that body, of which he is the master, just as much as the supreme God of all moves
this universe. And as the universe which is in some degree
perishable is moved by God, who is himself eternal, so is the frail body moved by an
immortal soul. 19. For that which moves all the time is eternal;
but that which imparts motion to something else and itself receives its motion from some
other source, must have a limit to its life because its motion can end. Therefore that only which moves of itself,
because it never abandons itself so it never ceases to move. Moreover this is the source, this is the original
cause of motion to all other things that move. Now an original cause has no origin; for all
things originate from it, but the original cause itself cannot arise from anything else. For it would not be an original cause if it
had originated from something else. And as it has no origin so it never perishes. For if the original cause once perish it will
neither be itself reproduced by another nor will it create another from itself; since
all things must necessarily spring from the original cause. Hence we see that the original cause of motion
resides in that, which is itself self-motive. Now that can neither be born nor die; otherwise
the whole heaven and all nature would collapse and come to a standstill, nor would it find
any power to give it the first impulse of motion. 20. Since therefore it is plain that what is self-motive
is eternal, who can deny that this quality is an attribute of our souls? For, whereas everything is soulless that receives
its impulse from without, that, on the contrary, which has a soul, moves by an inward motivation
of its own. For this is the natural property and essence
of the soul. And if this is the only thing in the world
that is self-motive, assuredly it has had no beginning but is eternal. 21. Exercise this soul in the noblest activities. Now the noblest are cares and exertions for
our country's welfare. And the soul which has been enlivened and
trained by these will speed more fleetly to this its resting-place and home. And this will it do more readily if, even
while still imprisoned in the body it strains beyond it, and, surveying that which lies
outside it, as much as possible, endeavours to withdraw itself from the body. For the souls of those who have given themselves
over to the pleasures of the body, and have yielded themselves to be their servants, as
it were, and at the prompting of those lusts which wait upon pleasures have broken the
laws of God and man; when they have glided from their bodies, go grovelling over the
face of the earth; nor do they return to this place, except after many ages of wandering." So he departed, and I woke from my dream. And with that, my friends, let us also awake
from his dream. I’ll let the text stand on its own in light
of all the other lectures we’ve done together on this subject (namely those on Pythagoreanism,
Platonism, Aristotelianism, Stoicism, etc.). We’ll return to continue this subject of
anabasis, or celestial ascent at another time, but for now, you’ve been listening to Encyclopedia
Hermetica: A Big History, Part 46 and I am your humble rambling librarian, Dan Attrell. 