Good day to One and All and welcome to today’s
talk on the debates in the recent historiography of the concepts “Platonic Orientalism”
and “Western Esotericism” – on account of length I’ve been forced to break this
up into two talks, the first being largely concerned with setting up the backdrop for
the debates and explaining the concept of “Platonic Orientalism” (which feeds into
Western Esotericism) and the second talk being concerned with the actual debates in the scholarly
literature (using direct quotations by and large)… OK, so historiography - now, right off the
bat, what does that mean? Historiography is the history of history,
that is to say, the history of how our historical narratives come into being: who are the historians
writing our history, what are the conditions in their lives which produce work such as
theirs. Well the plan is to bring this idea down to
bear upon quote-unquote “Western Esotericism” – and this is exactly where it starts to
get complicated, because Western Esotericism is not a reified thing, in and of itself – it’s
not even exactly a clear idea – nevertheless, the reason you’re probably all here listening
to me is because you have some understanding or another of what this nebulous “Esotericism”
thing is, let alone “Western Esotericism.” I’m not even going to try and define it
here, because that’s what we’re going to be covering in this miniseries – that
is… the history of the history of an ‘umbrella term’ that has no historical “essence”
in and of itself – like a greater whole made up from the sum of its disparate lesser
parts. Now this debate largely hinges around the
work of Wouter J. Hanegraaff, Esotericism in the Academy, and all of the debates surrounding
that book as raised by his various colleagues throughout Europe (that is, fellow scholars
of Hermetic and/or other related subjects). If you’re not going to go out and read this
book, Esotericism in the Academy, or read all the reviews which have been collated in
the journal Religion (I’ll provide a bibliography in the notes), then probably your best bet
to get some context is to mosey on over to the Ritman Library’s YouTube page and watch
all of Wouter Hanegraaff’s Infinite Fire Webinar in three parts. This should give you a good grasp of some
of the concepts were going to discuss here, but I’m going to do my best to reiterate
most of the ideas discussed there as they become important to our talk. I’m going to lay my cards out on the table
right away, this talk is largely going to be made up of the ideas presented by Hanegraaff,
and the next talk is going to feature lots of citations from other scholars criticizing
him (and his response), so I will do my due diligence to cite them all carefully and present
their arguments in an organized manner, preferably in their own words so as to not create strawmen
(and again, I’ll have a bibliography in the notes if you want to check these debates
out for yourself). I’m not even going to be discussing the
book Esotericism in the Academy very much, so much as the debates around what “Esotericism”
even means. I think probably the best place to start,
and where Wouter Hanegraaff himself would probably start is with a few words on “Platonic
Orientalism.” Understanding the various paths which Platonism
took in late antiquity is crucial for grasping the colourful array of belief-systems involved
in what is now labelled “Western Esotericism” namely, quote: “a distinct form of spirituality
extending from Hermeticism, Neo-Platonism, and Gnosticism in the early Christian era
up until the present.” Now this handful of esoteric currents was
diffused throughout Arab and Byzantine cultures throughout the middle ages before experiencing
a kind of “revival” through the Florentine Neo-Platonists of the late 15th century. From the 16th century onwards, “esoteric
(or unorthodox) spirituality” was carried out by Renaissance astrologers, alchemists
and magicians, Christian Kabbalists, theosophists, Rosicrucians, Freemasons, and Natural philosophers,
until the modern Victorian-Era “occult” revival in which post-colonial syncretism
and the Theosophy of Helena Petrovna Blavatsky played a key role. Alongside this “Western” tradition (or
perhaps inextricably bound up with it) were the Arabic and Jewish traditions: astrology,
alchemy, natural philosophy, etc. entered the “the west” through southern Italy
and Spain starting around the tenth century onwards (culminating in the later half of
the 15th century). [NOTE: something I think is worth mentioning
before moving on, and that is that when scholars use the word “occult” it is strictly referring
to 19th century occultism (the Donnellys, the Blavatskys, the Bessants, etc.), not general
esotericism as a whole. [end note]
Now in light of this gloss, you should realize that “Platonic Orientalism” is an extremely
loaded term, and I will do my best to explain what it means and why it has any value. Ultimately, “Platonic Orientalism” is
a historiographical concept, not a historical reality. It a concept which delineates the study of
reception, of a reception, of a reception… what I mean by that is that it is a concept
which encapsulates within itself all the discourse, all the chatter, which you should all be very
familiar to you, surrounding the idea that there was an “ancient wisdom tradition”
which had allegedly come from the Orient, was synthesized by Plato, was re-exported
into the lands conquered by Alexander the Great, then were “re-received” if you
will. Now, before you freak out, know that nobody
is claiming whether this is true or not – there are hundreds of different theories as to who
Plato or Pythagoras jacked their ideas from, and they are all interesting, but they’re
not going to be discussed here. What matters is what people believed throughout
history, particularly during the Renaissance and in the Florentine Academy. So I’ll explore this concept in a lot more
detail… this idea that the so-called “mysticism of the Orient” was reformulated by Plato,
whose impact on history was just as much as a religious thinker like Buddha or Christ
as it was as some kind of a “rationalist” logician. In Hanegraaff’s words: there are two competing
strains in philosophy, rational and mystical – the mystical is “academically homeless,”
the rational is center stage. Now what complicates the term “Platonic
Orientalism” even moreso is that everyone immediately thinks of Edward Said’s book
on post-colonial literary criticism called “Orientalism”, and that’s all fine and
good because there are many interesting concepts in that book, but ultimately, “Platonic
Orientalism” has little to do with Said’s theories (which postulate that the West understands
itself against it’s own imagined image of a kind of monolithic East, so in other words,
western society constructs its identity against the backdrop of concepts like Eastern “decadence”
“tyranny” “barbarism” “lustiness” “wealth” and so forth; so corresponding
to these, we have classic Western values “frugality” “freedom” “civilization” “restraint”
and these sorts of concepts. Now there’s much more to this idea, and
over the last few decades it’s spawned an entire lens through which we can break down
literature. I remember I was at a medieval conference,
and there was a session being held there called “Fuck Orientalism” – this gave me a
good laugh because I totally understand why some medievalists might not care about post-colonial
theory (or any post-modern theory for that matter) but in any case – Said’s idea
of “Orientalism”, according to Hanegraaff, is but a mere chapter in a larger story. Now the term “Platonic Orientalism” wasn’t
coined by Hanegraaff himself, it was a specialist of medieval Islamic mysticism – John Walbridge
– who came up with the term in his explorations of Suhrawardi, a Persian philosopher who fused
Zoroastrian and Platonic thought. Now what Hanegraaff argues, and this is a
key component in his argument as we’ll come to see, is that the idea of “Platonic Orientalism”
(maybe not in those words, but as an ongoing historiographical concept) was actually a
widespread idea in antiquity – particularly in Late Antiquity, and this idea consists
of two elements: the first being [again] that Plato was not a “philosophe” in the modern
sense of the word (a kind of European Enlightenment Anti-Pre-Socratic figure focused on rational
knowledge), but was moreso important in his role as a religious thinker (someone who teaches
a kind of “wisdom tradition” with religious import). Now obviously, in the pre-modern world, religion
and philosophy are inseparable, and so it’s only through modern (post-enlightenment) categories
that we have to even think this way about Plato (that is, that a mystical thinker is
somehow antithetical to a “mathematical” or “scientific” thinker). So this is one reason why Hanegraaff is endorsing
the “Platonic Orientalism” idea, because many philosophers in antiquity understood
Plato in this way. Now the second part, and this is just as vital
as the first, is that Plato was not the originator of this Wisdom tradition he taught. No, this was the sum of “oriental wisdom”
which had been gathered by travelling philosophers, priests, Brahmin, and magi – and whether
the Greeks went and got it, or whether the ideas came to them – they passed on through
the ages and finally reached Plato who merely understood the concepts clearly enough to
explain them in terms his fellow Greeks would understand. So… again, whether this is actually true
or not is not what matters – you can go full skeptic and say everything that ever
happened in the world was an independent development, or you can go full Blavatsky and think that
“The Secret Doctrine” was received in its perfect form in India, and the further
you go from there, the more “degraded” the wisdom tradition got – it’s all entirely
debateable, and there are as many theories as there are thinkers on the subject… no,
what matters is that people believed it was true. Now, I’ll go on a little digression here
because I think it’s important. The rate of change in our world is astounding…
the world I see out my window is not the world I saw out my window 5 years ago, let alone
20 years ago. It’s very easy for us to see this relentless
change and think that “progress” is some kind of unseen force tugging on the strings
of history… that things somehow naturally will get better with time, and even the sky
isn’t the limit. Now in ancient times, things moved much more
slowly. In fact things moved SO slowly, that it was
hard to conceive of an idea like “progress” at all – the “continuity” just outweighed
the “change”, big time, even enough to offset the bias we have toward “change”
because it’s exciting. Now what this did was it made people look
to the antiquity of a thing for its legitimacy, rather than its novelty. The idea was that at some point in time there
was a Golden Age, when men and gods practically lived together and communed in divine wisdom
in some sort of Edenic paradise, and from that point things just got worse and worse
– degrading by degree until we reach the most barbarous age, the Kali Yuga, or the
age of iron that we live in now. Romanticizing the past is a way people project
their alienation from the world… at least, that was the case for most people back then. Today, we project our alienation, our hopes
and fears, into the future – into all manner of science fiction scenarios or utopian visions
of a perfect society. Now why I’m saying this, is because up until
the Enlightenment, it was this former model which ruled supreme: the older a thing was,
the better it was, the truer, the purer, the more pristine. So now even if Plato made up everything he
wrote on his own (which he definitely didn’t), it would be in his best interest to link himself
to an ancient tradition, and try to get some of that legitimizing mana for his own system. We, today, have things very differently…
we’re always after the latest updates, the latest textbooks, the latest everything – in
hopes that the errors of the past have been ironed out. Well obviously anyone who’s ever loved Classic
Cars, Vintage Amps, or Windows XP knows that newer doesn’t mean better, and that they
just don’t make things like they used to. In any case, this will become important again. So, moving on and fast-forward about 6-7 centuries,
and what we have is this Orientalized Platonic “wisdom tradition” being assimilated by
Christianity – they are stripping all the wheat from the works of the pagan philosophers,
and separating them from the chaff (that is, everything that supports the narrative of
Christian theology can stay, while the rest is to be relegated to the trash bin. So here we have the Church Fathers trying
to reconcile the words of Jesus St. Paul with Platonic concepts, and surprisingly things
fit rather nicely (remember that the quote-unquote “Books of the Platonists” are what set
Augustine on his philosophical journey towards Christianity). Platonic Orientalism thus becomes a part of
Christianity – it is absorbed, if you will, particularly in the Greek speaking East. Throughout the middle-ages, the only thing
the West had of Plato was the Timaeus, his most comprehensive and also his most mystical
work. Now, Christians were faced with a huge intellectual
problem in light of what I mentioned concerning the proportional relationship between the
legitimacy and the antiquity of an idea. If you wanted your beliefs to hold any authority,
you had to prove that they were somehow part of an unbroken chain of Wisdom that was very,
very old. Since the Christian Church Fathers understood
this, many of them having been pagans themselves earlier in their lives, they were always reaching
further and further back for older sources to legitimize the new religion. Of course the Neo-Platonists and scribe-priests
of Hellenistic Egypt held the oldest source to be Hermes Trismegistus, the Pythagoreans
revered Orpheus, while others yet said the Zoroaster was the root of all ancient wisdom,
but the Church Fathers ultimately said : “No, Moses is at the root of this whole intellection
tradition – at Sinai there were two revelations, one written in stone, and one written in Moses’
heart” – later in the middle ages this “tradition” or “reception” would acquire
the name Kabbalah, but it’s a bit too soon to speak of that here with the Church Fathers
(though mysticism and wisdom-literature had of course been a well-known aspect of post-second
temple Judaism). Now Lactantius is a good example of a Christian
who interacted with pagan sources – he even mentioned Hermes Trismegistus, and in no mean
terms either. This, of course, was not universal since many
Church Fathers rejected all pagan wisdom (hence the rhetorical question: “What has Athens
to do with Jerusalem?”) – I’d like to think it’s sort of like
smoking; you never fine people who are more against smoking than ex-smokers, in the same
way you’ll never find people who are more against pagan ideas coexisting with Christianity
than former pagans. Obviously it’s because they love it and
they’re scared, but I’m not going to go there. Now… why do we even need an idea like this
– this “Platonic Orientalism.” Here’s where it gets a bit murkier, and
actually, this implicates yours truly for similar reasons. “Platonic Orientalism” is the term Hanegraaff
wants to use as a kind of intellectual cudgel to beat the life out of Dame Frances Yates’
grand narrative of a “Hermetic Tradition.” So what’s being referred to here is the
idea, as put forward by Frances Yates in her widely popular “Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic
Tradition” that modern science emerged out of medieval/renaissance magic, and that “Hermeticism”
was the tradition which coaxed out, or facilitated this process. I should mention that this whole talk implicates
Terence McKenna as well, since he absolutely loved the Yates narrative, and made it a cornerstone
of one of his speaking tours (I think the role Terence had on popularizing Yates is
wildly underplayed, but that’s another story). Now Francis Yates (back in the year 1964)
tried to put Hermeticism at the root of modern Western science – that was her a priori
assumption, and so she tried to force a narrative around that idea by cherry-picking a bunch
of big names from the Renaissance, telling us a bunch of stuff about them, and then labelling
them all “Hermeticists” (where the word “Esotericism” or, you guessed it, “Platonic
Orientalist” would have been clearer or more honest). Marsilio Ficino, Pico Della Mirandola, Giordano
Bruno – none of these people identified as “Hermeticists” so why even use the
label? Now what needs to be admitted is that since
Yates and her “noble lie” (maybe that’s a little strong), but since her work, intellectual
historians, historians of science and philosophy, etc. have finally begun to give honest attention
to the pre-modern sciences of alchemy, astrology, etc.. Before Yates, these were just superstitious
follies and spending any time on the history of these subjects was a waste of time; after
Yates, these were legitimate objects of historical inquiry. Now despite this, Hanegraaff thinks it is
far too much of a stretch to say science emerged directly from the Hermetic tradition – and
that this is quote “Yates’ great exaggeration.” She was not trying to understand Hermeticism
on its own terms; she was studying it as means to an end: modern science. In her mind Hermeticism was synonymous with
“magic”, and therefore she placed “magic” at the root of “science.” Now in 1964, this was highly controversial,
but it got lots of attention from the popular reader, and once it got into their hands,
defining “Hermeticism” got out of hand. Modern science could be said to have emerged
in some sense from the musings of astrologers and the tinkering of alchemists, but to what
extent are these “magicians” in the sense of the Renaissance magus – the one who reads
Picatrix and Asclepius and calls down the planetary spirits from images, and reveres
the wisdom of Hermes Trismegistus? It boils down to a case by case basis – Cornelius
Agrippa was definitely one of these people, but Marsilio Ficino (a Platonist) and Pico
Della Mirandola (a Christian Kabbalist) were not! Incidentally, Yates completely ignores and
leaves out one of the REAL Hermeticists, that is, the Christian poet Ludovico Lazzarelli. This guy didn’t fit into Yates’ grand
narrative - he was too minor, too obscure to hinge a grand narrative off of, and – most
importantly – he didn’t care about science OR magic! So he really didn’t fit the part for the
play she was writing. The problem is this, as Hanegraaff argues
(and I think he’s missing the Picatrix from his picture, whereas Yates doesn’t, but
we’ll ignore that here since it doesn’t change too too much): the whole magical tradition
of the Renaissance derives from one Hermetic work which survived in the Latin West called
“the Asclepius.” Now the Corpus Hermeticum itself was totally
unknown to the Latin west until its rediscovery during the Renaissance. Now, Frances Yates quotes the Poimandres of
the C.H. about 30 times, but the rest of it barely ever, but then she also cites the Asclepius
110 times. In short: the Hermetic style magic seen in
the Asclepius was not new to the 15th century – what was new was the Corpus Hermeticum,
and it was (according to Hanegraaff) not magic – the bits that are magic are from the Asclepius,
and this was already well known to the Middle-Ages. So what it ultimately means then is that there
is no Renaissance “hermetic tradition” as envisioned by Francis Yates. The real “Hermetic Tradition” was rather,
Hanegraaff tells us, “Platonic Orientalism.” Now of course there are problems here – this
begs the question “how do you define magic if, say, the Poimandres is not magical”
– and doubtless Hanegraaff has dealt with that elsewhere in his voluminous works, but
to me personally, “magic” doesn’t necessarily have to be a practical, hands-on thing; I
think a book describing gnosis or mystical revelation in some kind of initiatory mode
qualifies as magic, but anyhow… what’s important is that, we need to reconceptualise
Hermeticism as a historical reality because Yates has entirely hijacked the narrative. Alright, so in place of the “Hermetic Tradition”
– Hanegraaff offers us “Platonic Orientalism” and what I’d like you to do is to imagine
this as a jewel with many facets, or perhaps a rope with many strands. Ultimately, there are three main facets or
strands, and further subvariations thereof: 1) there is a Mosaic strand; ii) there’s
a Zoroastrian strand; and iii) there’s a Hermetic strand, each of which were reinterpreted
through the lens of Hellenistic Platonism [remember: whether real or merely perceived
is another issue]. Now in the Renaissance what was understood
to have happened is that Early Christianity had adopted the Orientalized Platonic tradition
by drawing from the Mosaic strand – Marsilio Ficino came up with the concept of a “prisca
theologica” (that is, a pristine form of universal all-encompasing ancient wisdom)
and that this had to have come to someone first, before it was taught to subsequent
generations of sages via initiation. This “prisca theologica” is what many
people today call, albeit problematically, “Hermeticism” (in large part thanks to
Yates). The problem is that Hermes was just one of
the many “ancient sages” competing for primacy in the chain of this wisdom tradition
– it isn’t a given that everyone believed Hermes Trismegistus to be the source of all
wisdom. So let’s unpack this further… It’s been argued that Marsilio Ficino, who
was translating the complete works of Plato for Cosimo De Medici, had to interrupt his
work to translate the “Corpus Hermeticum” when it came over to Italy from Greece. Now, the way the Yates narrative goes, she
makes it seem like the reason he interrupted the translations of Plato for Hermes was purely
because Hermes Trismegistus was believed to be older, and therefore more authoritative. Tthe problem is, however, that this narrative
overlooks the more pragmatic aspects of why this was done… the fact was simply that
the Corpus Hermeticum was much shorter than the complete works of Plato, so it could be
but a brief detour. Nevertheless, Ficino finished his translation
in 1473. Now years before this, in 1464, during the
translation process, and in large part thanks to Gemisthus Plethon who I’ll discuss in
a moment, Ficino had a change of heart. What was this change of heart? Well, after doing a bunch of scholarship,
Ficino changed his mind about where the “Prisca Theologica” came from and who was its source. He no longer believed Hermes to be the oldest
in the Wisdom-Tradition chain – no, rather he thinks, like Gemisthus Plethon, that all
the wisdom contained in the Corpus Hermeticum, in the Bible and in Plato, that these can
all be reliably traced back to the prophetic teachings of the Zoroaster (or Zarathustra). This had been the position held by the Byzantine
crypto-Christian Neoplatonic scholar par excellence, Georgius Gemistus, who later called himself
Plethon or Pletho (i.e. Plato). This sagely figure single handedly was responsible
for saving Plato&amp;#39;s thoughts from certain destruction at the hands of the Ottoman Turks, and re-introducing
them to Western Europe during the 1438–1439 Council of Florence (which had been a kind
of failed attempt to reconcile the East-West schism before the fall of Constantinople in
1453). It was here that old man Pletho, now 80 years
old, met and influenced a very young Cosimo de Medici to found a new Platonic Academy,
which, under Marsilio Ficino, would be responsible for the translation of Plato’s texts into
Latin (including the Enneads of Plotinus, and various other Neoplatonic works, such
as the Chaldean Oracles.) Now it’s these Chaldean Oracles which convinced
both Pletho and Ficino that the Zoroaster was at the root of all ancient wisdom (which
by the way, like the Corpus Hermeticum, these oracular texts are not as ancient as they
were believed to be – it’s just that the latent “orientalism” of the Western mind
lends antiquity, mystery, and authority to a thing merely by virtue of it coming from
“the East”). They believed the Chaldean Oracles to be the
oldest text, and they saw in them the same glimmers of wisdom which they had gleaned
from Plato, so naturally they assumed these to have been crucial in influencing Plato
(when in fact, it was the other way around – they, like the Corpus Hermeticum, are
a 2nd century AD text replete with a syncretism of contemporary gnostic ideas. They, of course, didn’t know that yet.) Now this obviously poses a problem – remember
that old Pletho isn’t really a Christian so he doesn’t actually have a dog in the
fight; Ficino, however, does. This poses a problem because what it means
is that – if there is only one source of “Prisca Theologica” or “Ancient Wisdom”
then that means that revelations of Moses are subordinate to those of a Pagan… meaning
he couldn’t have got them from God (except as some kind of parallel or independent revelation). Well this here was one of THE big debates
of the Renaissance: whether the foundations of Christian doctrine were indeed rooted in
the dualistic revelations of a swarthy pagan like Zoroaster, or some Ibis-headed Sorcerer
like Hermes Trismegistus, or if after all, they were really rooted in the visions of
Moses (who, let us not forget, was raised and educated in Egypt, and believed to have
been initiated in both the mysteries of the old gods, and those of Jethro the Midianite’s
God). Now for some thinkers (Lazzarelli, Agrippa,
etc.) it didn’t matter that Christianity emerged out of pagan wisdom – what was true
wisdom was true wisdom regardless of who said it. All that mattered was whether or not it could,
in the end, be reconciled with the teachings in both the Old and New Testament. The idea was that pagan wisdom was “fulfilled”
through the person and sacrifice of Christ (So, for example, to Ludovico Lazzarelli,
the Pimander of Ficino (or Poimandres of the Greek Hermetica) WAS Christ, the embodied
Logos and the second person of the trinity.) Just remember to keep in mind that these were
potentially heretical, therefore dangerous statements to make, especially on paper! Henry Cornelius Agrippa even made Hermes the
grandson of Abraham to deal with the problem! Anything that was not the patristic genealogy
of wisdom was heterodox and highly suspect. Now for other renaissance scholars, particularly
for Pico Della Mirandola (1463-1494), they could not suffer Moses being more recent than
Zoroaster or Hermes – such a thing was preposterous, and out of this outrage was born the concept
of the Christian Kabbalah, which was the idea that Moses had received a perfected form of
perfect wisdom directly from God on Sinai, and it was this same Wisdom that Christ himself
physically embodied (and thus understood perfectly without needing to be taught): the tree of
Knowledge of Good and Evil was language itself, which cut us off from the One Great Divine
Reality, and the Tree of Life was the re-ascent of the mind back to the contemplation of Divine
Oneness. The problem obviously is that Kabbalah is
a medieval Jewish phenomenon, not an Ancient Hebrew one, and he’s retro-projecting it
back into a mythic past. He was claiming for the first time ever that
we have the root knowledge of Christianity, but that this was kept secret by the Jews
who did not even have a complete understanding of it, and only now that such wisdom is in
Christian hands can it be correctly understood. Again, this is his imagination… but Christians
now think they can study Kabbalah and use it as a key to unlocking the mysteries of
Christianity. Now along with Kabbalah comes a number of
Jewish exegetical practices and these would be invaluable tools to Humanist textual criticism. Now all this kind of Kabbalistic thinking
was critical in the formation of Christian Theosophy as exemplified by the works of Jakob
Boehme or the birth of Rosicrucianism in the early 17th century. There’s a great number of things I’d like
to say more about this, but unfortunately, this talk will be long enough as it is without
going down all the avenues. What matters is that, ultimately, the greater
circle which encompasses all these lesser circles (Kabbalah, Zoroastrianism/Chaldean
Magic/Hermeticism) is the concept of “Platonic Orientalism” – all of these traditions
are basically dolled-up aesthetically-reinvisioned forms of Platonic mysticism, and it’s no
coincidence that they all start popping up back into popular religious imagination right
around the time of Plato’s return to Europe. “Kabbalah” was one way of understanding
the message of Platonism which worked for Jewish sensibilities, “Hermeticism” for
pagan sensibilities, and “Zoroastrianism” for those with even more hardcore Orientalist
sensibilities – but ultimately, they were all just looking at different versions of
the same thing: Late Antique mystical Platonic idealism. OK – so back to how Hanegraaff defines who
and what is “a Hermeticist”, and why Yates abuses the term: to Hanegraaff, if you don’t
believe Hermes to be the root of all wisdom, you’re apparently not a Hermeticist. This isn’t how I define it, I find this
definition painfully narrow, but this is his working definition, and that’s all that
matters for our talk. My problem with this view is that there were
texts in circulation before the Renaissance, such as the Picatrix, which have plenty of
instances of Hermes/Mercurius, and these instances are strictly within a magical (rather than
a “Gnostic/initiatory”) context – so to me, practitioners of the kind of magic
contained in the Picatrix are “Hermeticists” (people who were completely unaware of the
Corpus Hermeticum or Marsilio Ficino) – but not so to Hanegraaff. Now Yates actually talks about the Picatrix
in setting up her grand Hermetic narrative, and it was a key component to priming the
world for works like the Poimandres. In any case, I’d love to see how Hanegraaff
fits it all in to his own narrative (it’s possible he’s done it somewhere and I just
haven’t yet seen it). Maybe one day if I’m lucky I can get him
to come on here and we can hash this problem out… but anyhow… If we are to go along with Hanegraaff’s
narrow definition, what we’ll find is that actual Hermeticists are few and far between. The main thinker who Hanegraaff brings up
is Ludovico Lazzarelli (whose works like the Krater Hermetis he translated into English). Ludovico Lazzarelli had rejected the Classical
tradition (after having thoroughly imbibed it via humanist training), and this he did
in favour of Christian teachings, but not without a great deal of reconciliation first
– he saw in scripture the same thing, I think, that Augustine saw: a kind of pure,
simple, Platonic doctrine that paganism in all its philosophical baroqueness could not
encapsulate (of course this has to do with a change in people’s values from Late Antiquity
onwards, but we’re not going to go there here). Now in his dialogue the Krater Hermetis, Lazzarelli
imagined himself initiating King Ferdinand I and his court poet/administrator Giovanni
Pontano into the mysteries of Christian Hermeticism. His radical idea was that, yes, the ‘True
Wisdom’ had begun with Hermes, but it was fulfilled or redeemed by Christ. It was part of the grand Christian narrative
of salvation, that God had revealed himself first to the pagans, and that he might later
redeem the whole world through the seeds he had planted – don’t forget, Abraham was
a virtuous Chaldean pagan before God revealed himself to him, so ultimately, there have
to be pagans getting credit somewhere along the line. Now, again, Henry Cornelius Agrippa (in his
Three Books on Occult Philosophy) believed in accordance with Lazzarelli that Hermes
Trismegistus was the root of all Wisdom. I should mention that there’s plenty of
evidence of Agrippa having had a copy of the Picatrix, but that’s another story. He believed that Hermes was the grandson of
Abraham as a creative way to yoke everyone together (the Chaldeans, the Hebrews, and
the Egyptians) to fix the problem that Hermes was older than Moses. Agrippa adopted Lazzarelli’s views that
Christ was Pimander, and he writes in his Oratio Habita Papiae, (1515) that quote: “the
Thrice great Pimander Mercurius, mind of divine power, [is] our Lord the crucified Nazarene
Jesus Christ, who is the true Pimander, who as the messenger of great counsel illuminates
our mind with the true Light, whom we profess to be truly God and truly man, the father
of regeneration, and whom we expect as the judge of the coming age.” Here we’re going to fast forward to the
17th century, when all these similar intellectual currents start taking root at the heart of
all kinds of Heretical and Orthodox. Now during the Counter Reformation, this idea
comes out – thanks to the work of all these different Platonic Orientalists - that the
author of all heresies is PLATO. In fact, there’s one idea that is put forth
during the Counter-Reformation, and it is a kind of razor claims that the mother of
all abominations, the source of all heresies, was the belief that the world was Eternal,
rather than a one-off blast of creative energy which came Ex Nihilo. The eternity of the world implied that human
souls were not created, but emanated from God’s own essence, such that they have an
inborn spark of the divine itself. As a result, one does not need to believe,
on the authority of established traditions or Holy Scriptures, let alone believe in an
external saviour or redeemer – no, if we emanated from God, then we can know God directly. Now this capacity for gnosis was obviously
dangerous in that it subverted all of the authority of bible and church. Now I think there’s something to this idea,
especially when you start getting into all sorts of crazy stuff like the Nag Hammadi
Library, or much later, Helena Blavatsky’s Secret Doctrine, but it also has its issues
(did the Zoroastrians not have a built in eschatology, the Hermeticists with their Lament
of Hermes, and what of the different factions of Judaism (Pharisees, Saducees, and Essenes)
who all differed their opinions regarding the soul, angels, and life after death?). Now during the Counter-Reformation, the idea
came about that when Christianity was victorious, they should have destroyed Platonism altogether,
but instead it was infected by the Platonic knowledge it tried to reconcile itself with. When I heard this, the first thing my brain
did was re-work an old poem of Horace’s to say “Plato took captive his savage conqueror
and brought his arts into rustic Augustine” paralleling and reiterating the idea that
the culture of the Greeks captured its Latin conquerors. Now the problem is that this Catholic Counter
Reformation thought was actually giving ammunition to the 17th century Protestant “anti-apolegeticists”
(as they are called) who asked themselves: “Well who was it that invited in the virus
of Platonic paganism” – obviously it wasn’t us “pure” Christians, it was the Catholic
Church! It’s the Church Fathers who are responsible
for the degeneration of Christianity by inviting in Plato, so what good are they to us anyhow? And so from that idea, there were great debates
between Protestants and Catholics over the Platonizing influence Christianity had accumulated
over top of the “pure” gospel message. Now this, effectively, is where the idea of
“Western Esotericism” spawned, as a kind of “waste-basket” theory, or perhaps a
more dignified way to put it is “as the shadow cast by Orthodoxy.” That is, what is heterodoxy (what has to be
stuffed away and hidden) but the inversion of orthodoxy? Obviously people kept thinking about philosophy,
theology and mysticism, but what could not be classified as “Orthodox Catholicism”
or some various strands of Protestantism, was by nature “heterodox” and thus ferreted
away. The sum total of these heterodox ideals, then,
whether or not they even actually had anything in common with one another other than being
rejected by the mainstream, end up in one gigantic category called “Western Esotericism”
and deconstructing this concept will be the topic of the second part of this lecture. What I’ll say for now is this: “Western
Esotericism” is not a concrete thing in and of itself, it is a historiographical concept,
and so the great debates I will be exploring in my next lecture are about whether or not
it is justifiable to even use such a non-essentialized concept like “Esotericism” to do history. Historians are supposed to apply “historicity”
– that is, they’re supposed to understand historical people on their own terms, using
their own language, not with a top-down superimposed retro-projected “umbrella terms” which
can hardly be defined. We’ll unpack this more when we return, getting
into the debates as to whether Hanegraaff can truly be called a “historian” or whether
he should be called a “discourse theoretician” (which I suppose is a kind of Literary Critic). I’ll give you a hint though: Hanegraaff,
like myself, is no great lover of post-modernism, though he’s going to be forced to deal with
all the criticisms which are levied by it. I’ll see you next time, and thanks for listening. 