Over recent decades, scholars of the Early
Modern European religious landscape have worked hard to disentangle the mass of socio-economic
and cultural movements which both influenced and con-stituted the collapse of what Johan
Huizinga once called ‘The Waning’ or perhaps more euphemistically, ‘The Autumn of the
Middle Ages,’ which began to see a disintegration in the critical mass of belief in Catholic
‘Traditional Christianity,’ and opened up Europe to a proliferation of new Weltanschauungen. Once firmly entrenched in northern Europe,
the so-called ‘humanist’ movement expanded the options for thinking, teaching, and exploring
the world that had been passed down through the Middle Age as a body of intellectual property
common to all who could engage with it. A new type of literary studies, shaped by
the reading of classical rhetoric and poetry in their original forms (i.e. stripped of
excessive marginalia and commentary), provoked numerous reforms in education and ultimately,
in the taste, ethics, and aesthetics of public life. Once coupled with a technology of viral dissemination,
the printing press, this philosophy which had initially spurred on the Italian Renaissance
beginning with the 14th century works of Dante and Petrarch, led to a great influx of translations
of classical texts and subsequently, biblical texts too. Renaissance humanism found its way into many
disciplines and contexts by the turn of the 16th century precisely because it was ill-defined. Beginning with Lorenzo Valla’s falsification
of the infamous Donation of Constantine’s historical authenticity (c. 1440), the Italian
Renaissance humanists gradually opened up the emerging Northern European bourgeois mind
to a kind of historical consciousness or ‘temporalization’ (first among elite literary circles in their
République des Lettres, but eventually trickling down to the ear of the common man). In the early decades following the turn of
the 16th century, the over-lap between the new religious reform movements (as typified
by figures like Luther, Calvin, and Zwingli), and the older humanist movement (as typified
by Desiderius Erasmus, etc.), was rooted in a shared passion for the pristineness of antiquity,
especially with regards to its literary products, whether Christian, pagan, or otherwise. As we shall see, however, by surveying a number
of groundbreaking essays and monographs in the relatively recent historical literature
about the Reformation, this tense alliance was unable to endure beyond the dispelling
of misunderstandings between both parties, as many of the older humanists could not part
with their fundamentally stable Catholic worldviews, and could especially not overlook Luther’s
revolutionary writings of 1520 (even less so after the Peasants’ War of 1525), fearing
that the reform movement and its corresponding open revolts threatened to tear apart the
very fabric of society. Our survey begins with a close examination
of Church historian Bernd Moeller’s essay, first pub-lished in 1959 as Die deutschen
Humanisten und die Anfänge der Reformation, which was translated and first published for
an English audience in 1972 as The German Humanists and the Beginnings of the Reformation. As a Protestant theologian himself, Moeller’s
chief concern was to address those scholars who refuse to see the Reformation as an actual
historical event, rather than merely a collection of theo-logical phenomena with no real impact
beyond the universities of scholastics and literary circles of burgher humanists. Moeller urged his readers to envision the
Reformation holistically, as greater than the sum of its parts, situating it at the
heart of interactions between individuals and organizations throughout the 16th century. In Roland Bainton’s foundational biography
Here I Stand (1950), for example, there is very much a stress upon the medieval character
of Luther at the expense of what could be called his “Renaissance humanist” dimensions. To Bainton, Luther’s individualism was “not
the individualism of the Renaissance, seeking the fulfillment of the individual’s capacities;”
and it is was not even “the individualism of the late scholastics, who on metaphysical
grounds declared that reality consists only of individuals, and that aggregates like the
Church and state are not entities but simply the sum of their components” – his insistence,
rather, was to see Luther somewhat devoid of his intellectual influences, stating that
Luther’s theology simply hung on the crux “that every man must answer for himself
to God.” Moeller, on the other hand, argued that revolutions
with such deep an impact as the Reformation could not occur successfully without the appropriate
pathways having been trod beforehand. Sola Scriptura could only be understood within
the context of the return Ad fontes, the humanist project of returning back to the source. As such, Moeller wrote in order to explore
in what ways these two distinct movements, ‘northern Renaissance humanism’ and ‘the
Reformation,’ came to be conjoined. Throughout his work, Moeller demonstrates
how rewarding it can be to go beyond the titans of humanism, in particular Erasmus. Locked within its paradigms of periodization,
the scholarship leading up to Moeller’s time had considered the debates between Erasmus
and Luther as the case study par excellence which embodied the clash between “the Renaissance”
and “the Reformation.” Conversely, Moeller worked to show how multifaceted
and hard to distill that situation had really been. One of his principle insights, influenced
by the works of Herbert Schöffler, was to consider the German humanist movement not
as one monolithic block, but consisting of at least two groups divided by age, or what
Schöffler had called a “generational gap.” The most eminent humanists of Luther’s day,
most notably Erasmus, had all been members of an older generation of more moderate scholars
who, after resolving a number of misun-derstandings, pulled back from Luther’s radical and anti-authoritarian
break with Rome. It was, however, a younger generation of humanists
like Philip Melanchthon who had spent less time entrenched in the traditional Catholic
paradigm which first supported Luther and continued to support him despite the per-sonal
risks it entailed. As Luther’s message grew more and more uncomfortable,
it lost its appeal to the older generation of humanists, most of whom were conciliarists,
already comfortably established in scholarly leisure among the courts of European princes. Moeller did not think ‘humanism’ to be
an actual, reified, self-conscious movement existing from the late 14th to the 16th centuries,
nor did he believe its proponents to have existed in a bubble; rather, he considered
the word to be an anachronistic label created by a long and gradual culmination of 19th
and early 20th century historical scholarship which had finally settled on a word for an
artificially demarcated phenomenon. In other words, the very ‘prince of humanists,’
Erasmus, did not call himself a ‘humanist’ – this title was appended to him at a much
later date. Nonetheless, Moeller recognized what we today
call ‘humanism’ as having had a dual inheritance, being born of both medieval scholasticism
and the mentali-tés of the 13th and 14th century Italian Renaissance. He was conscious of humanism’s essence as
being “only superficially described by such rigid concepts as the love of antiquity,”
since he rather conceptual-ized it as “a gradual discovery of a new feeling for the
world and for life, a fresh enthusiasm for the power and freedom of man; [including]
a joyous readiness to learn about and to reshape earthly conditions.” In other words, the humanist worldview was
not merely characterized by a recognition of the depth of his-torical time, but also
the projection of a potentially better future rooted in a simple piety they referred to
as the philosophia Christi. Among scholars like Erasmus, Pirckheimer,
or Mutianus Rufus, “the humanist heritage, the rebirth of antiquity and especially of
languages, was a vocation and a lifelong project.” Their guiding principle, a concept formulated
by Mutianus, was the quasi-Epicurean beata tranquillitas – a tranquility which was
not only manifest in the outward quiet contemplation of the so-called “good letters” (bonae
litterae, i.e. what today we would call ‘the humanities’), but also in an inner ethical
dimension which sought detachment from the passions (best attained, they believed, precisely
in scholarly pursuits). “This detachment” writes Moeller, “made
possible for them a reasonable, simple, worship, free of all priestly servitude and superstition.” Despite this worldview, at the height of their
popularity, these literary luminaries were thronged about by swarms of “enthusiastic
but uncreative literati, who exchanged the golden glory of bonae litterae for chattering
and banal versifying and all too easily transformed the moral ideal of philosophia Christi into
an excuse for immorality.” Among the younger generation of humanists
(i.e. those who would come to Luther’s aid), this could not be sustained. In his own survey of The European Reformation,
first published in 1991 but updated and recently republished in 2012, Euan Cameron explains
how Erasmus had envisaged a ‘restoration’ (restitutio) of Christianity that would parallel
to the ‘rebirth’ (renascentia) of literature, with the former to be ushered in by a close
companionship with scripture, whose inescapable effect was the general improvement of mor-als. This program, however, was not without its
threats to the existing religious order, since humanism was generally critical and negative
in disposition, and might be said today to have been more ‘deconstructive’ than constructive. And even though the northern Renaissance is
best considered just one among the many challenges to ‘traditional Christianity,’ its practices
were very seductive to the clergy itself, making both priests and laypeople alike more
receptive to the vituperative critiques of the Protestant reformers. For intellectuals like the Hebrew scholar
Johannes Reuchlin (1455-1522) or the boisterous poet and knight Ulrich von Hutten (1488-1523),
who repeated many of the stock criticisms levied against the clergy, it was not considered
unusual to do so while simultaneously counting numerous individual churchmen among their
closest friends and allies. Following this early mode of living out humanism
(i.e. cultivating the quiet scholarly life either as an end in and of itself, or as a
means to achieving an ethical or religious goal), there evolved a new pattern among the
humanists, which in Moeller’s estimation, arose only post-1500. This new paradigm broke with the traditional
cyclical nature of time as embodied by the Church’s liturgical calendar with its annual
round of seasons and saints’ feasts, and its emphasis on the Ecclesiast’s injunction
“Sub Sole Nihil Novi Est.” As humanists sought to extend the utility
of their classical studies, they began bringing the insights borrowed from the ancient world
down to bear upon the affairs of contemporary everyday life “by seeking not only to understand
those conditions but to change them.” This new historicizing or temporalizing vision
of the world found its expression not only among physicians, natural philosophers, and
natural historians, but also among lawyers. One of the chief markers of this new vision
was expressed in the intensification of humanist involvement in the bustling and bothersome
political sphere. Moeller stresses that it was only after 1500
that “the positions of power at princely courts and in large imperial cities were being
filled by humanistically trained men or [at least] that the occupants of these offices
were taking remedial steps to obtain humanist training.” Prior to 1500, German humanists locked away
in their studies could not be bothered to participate in politics. This process, as Moeller explains, was inextricably
interconnected with the historical rise and development of the bourgeoisie. Cameron outlines this very process when explaining
how two main features of the old Church above all suffered from humanist satire: at one
extreme there stood academic theology, with its comedi-cally rigorous and convoluted debates
between competing scholastic schools (or viae); while at the other end there stood the credulous
superstition and fetishism perceived as rampant in contemporary popular piety. Cameron tells us that both were attacked specifically
“because they did not make their exponents better (that is, more virtuous Christians).” As the humanists saw it, theology suffered
from being bogged down by technical logic or Aristotelian ‘dialectic’ as used in
medieval philosophy (long considered but the ‘hand-maiden’ of theology). As such, the schoolmen were satirized for
their painstakingly pedantic and morally unedifying debates or thought exercises, forced through
the lens of an inelegant and arcane Latin jargon. Erasmus’ goddess, Folly (Stultitia), remarked
how: The apostles baptized wherever they went,
yet nowhere did they teach the formal, material, efficient, and final cause of baptism… Who could understand all of this unless he
has frittered away thirty-six whole years over the physics and metaphysics of Aristotle
and Scotus? In spite of all this, Cameron reminds us that
the “struggle between ‘scholasticism’ and ‘humanism’” was not actually clear
cut a battle with pitched sides, since these two spheres often collaborated quite amicably,
and sometimes they even coexisted in the same person. But ultimately, humanism had very little official
impact on the intellectual life of the universities. In pointing out that system’s stagnancy,
Moeller notes how many of the most revolutionary figures of the 15th and 16th centuries (e.g.
Nicholas of Cusa, Copernicus, Columbus, and Gutenberg), all worked totally independently
of the universities and their hierarchical faculties still thoroughly entrenched in the
baroque practices of Aristotelian scholasticism. Nevertheless, it was in this very milieu that
the Augustinian monk and professor of theology at Wittenberg, Martin Luther, who was to make
the most revolutionary of all ‘discoveries,’ by learning a new way to understand the gospel,
the incarnation of God in Jesus Christ, with which, writes Moeller, “he wrenched the
whole fabric of the Western world and thereby redirected humanism as well.” This great ‘discovery,’ however, (and
note Moeller’s religionist language here) could not have been conceived independently
of the humanists’ philological research projects. It would be an error, therefore, to think
humanism did not have an indirect albeit traumatic effect upon the traditional university on
account of the paradigm shift ushered in by Luther’s unintended Reformation. The perspective of Thomas A. Brady, Jr. – as
discussed in his 1997 monograph focused on the Strasbourg humanist and politician Jacob
Sturm, The Politics of The Reformation In Germany – is in agreement with Cameron in
that it is an exceedingly common misconception to place too much stress on the opposition
between scholasticism and humanism into two utterly irreconcilable intellectual camps. One major factor in complicating attitudes
toward humanist practices in German-speaking regions was the knee-jerk reaction against
all things Italian. And while Italy was the birth-place of humanism,
it was also the birth-place of papalism, which the largely conciliarist Imperial churchmen
of German regions typically rejected or critiqued. Brady gives us an example of the Viennese
theologian Konrad Säldner who scoffed at “the poets [rightly] said to be dilettantes,”
and who claimed that “in our days since the overthrow of the General Councils, Italian
authors have shown me little expertise in the higher learning or in morals conducive
to the building up of Holy Church.” Nevertheless, it would be a mistake to give
the impression that all Germans were scandalized, insulted by, or suspicious of Italians and
their cultural out-put. Luther’s eventual tirades or Ulrich von
Hutten’s chauvinism did not represent average sentiments, and in fact some Germans, like
Albrecht Dürer, found Italy most welcoming with his famous line written to Pirckheimer
on October 13th, 1506: “Here I am a gentleman, back home a mooch.” Moving beyond the false dichotomy of ‘admirers
versus critics,’ however, Brady tells us of a per-vasive sentiment throughout the 15th
and 16th centuries: that German-speaking scholars ought to imitate the Italian penchant for
learning, and thereby expunge the German-speaking lands of their reputation for drunkenness,
indolence, and barbarity. It was in 1425, while working in Hesse, that
the Florentine Gian Francesco Poggio Bracciolini (1380-1459) had uncovered the very last copy
of Tacitus’ Germania, re-nowned as an Italian’s admiration of Germanic noble savagery in an
age of Roman decadence. Once brought to Rome in 1455, Enea Silvio
Piccolomini (1405-64) – who would later become Pope Pius II – spread its fame far
and wide across the Holy Roman Empire. Above all, the recovery of this magisterial
ancient text encouraged German scholars to continue providing the people (those who could
read, or who would at least listen) with a meaningful past that might awaken a pride
of their ancestry and a desire to emulate (and thereby surpass) the Italians. This program of specifically German humanism
received its most vigorous impetus by Conrad Bickel (1459-1508), also known by his pen-name
“Celtis.” On August 31st, 1492, Bickel lectured at Ingolstadt,
admonishing Germans to immerse themselves in the rich histories of the ancient world:
Shame on you, who are ignorant of Greek and Latin history, but far more of the rivers,
mountains, monuments, and people of our land… Take up again that spirit, you German men,
which once made you the nemesis of the Romans… Now turn, turn, O you Germans, to more peaceful
studies and win thereby immortality and your country’s eternal praise! According to Brady, explicit patriotism and
the concern for one’s individual reputation were developed as high ideals for German humanists
throughout the Empire in the 16th century, and these values unfurled largely without
resistance since humanist studies occurred principally among burgher literary circles,
and only unofficially among the universities. The movement crusaded for better Latin and
emphasized the humanities, but in so far as it did this, it did not directly attack scholastic
learning. This assault would not be organized until
about 1510, when Erasmus was at the height of his influence over German-speaking humanists,
and especially so after the 1511 publication of his hit anti-clerical encomium, In Praise
of Fol-ly. “Around 1500” writes Brady, “the spirit
was different, more relaxed and more in tune with traditional culture. The writers of this age possessed a confidence
in the tested value of the genres and themes of old-er vernacular literature.” But all this would soon very rapidly change. Throughout the 1510s, the stand-ards for good
Latinity rose sharply as older writers like Wimpfeling and Reuchlin backed off and their
juniors waged savage literary war against what they perceived as the poor results delivered
by the mendi-cant orders and their traditional modes of teaching. An example of this can be found in the infamous
Let-ters of Obscure Men (1515-17) which harangued against bad Latin, the edifice of scholasticism,
and the friars trained in philosophy, theology, and law, who upheld the official institutions
of higher learning. Wimpfeling kicked up a storm of criticism
when he put forth the argument that St Augustine had never actually been a monk, and he especially
criticized monks for seducing patronage by the laity with un-founded claims. Yet up until the 1510s, Brady tells us the
German humanists were ultimately “neither very productive nor very militant.” And despite all their criticisms, nothing
was more distant from their minds than a radical reform of the Church, as they quickly filled
up the ranks of those who benefitted from personal patronage and the status quo. Initially, we are told by Cameron, it was
a respect for the ‘ideal Church’ which had prevented the humanists and their potentially
subversive scholarly techniques from bringing them to bear on the texts which made up the
Bible. It was only through a series of publishing
milestones that the idea of applying textual criticism to the Scriptures was gradually
broached: first with Giovanni Pico della Mirandola’s work on the Psalter; then Erasmus’s publication
of Lorenzo Valla’s Annotationes in 1505; then Reuchlin’s arrangement of a functional
Hebrew manual in 1506; and the commentaries on St Paul by Jacques Lefèbvre d’Étaples
in 1512. A less well known outgrowth of this chain
of publications was compilation of the ‘polyglot’ Bible at the Spanish University of Alcalà
published in 1520. In principle, anxieties ran high on account
of the new threats grammarians were posing to the monopoly of authority held by the theologians,
who ranked astronomically higher in the hierarchy of medieval academia. Turning now to focus on Luther specifically,
we can see how his area of concentration – despite this cultural climate – was largely indifferent
to the humanities. In fact, Luther would generally make a habit
of fighting against the humanists’ fashionable practice of finding all their answers to theological
problems in the practice of textual criticism, or against their lukewarm philosophia Christi. But above all, and without doubt, there was
one scholarly project which had nevertheless been critical in persuading Lu-ther toward
his own ultimate theological conclusions. The doctor from Wittenberg would never have
come to interpret the scriptures in the way he did were it not for his enthusiastic use
of Erasmus’ re-translation and edition of the Koiné Greek New Testament, known as the
Textus Receptus, which had first been published in 1517 while Luther was busy lecturing on
Paul’s epistle to the Romans. Years later, while hiding out in the Saxon
castle of the Wartburg under the pseudonym ‘Junker Jörg’ (“Sir George”), it
was the second edition of this text (printed in 1519) which Luther was to translate into
accessible German, modeled upon the simple speech of the common man (its intended audience). Erasmus had initially objected to the Vulgate
principally because he perceived it to be a corrupt and unreliable version. He and Valla before him had demonstrated how
the Bible could not be safely studied in the Vulgate, or really in any Latin translation,
without risking serious misinterpretation. In their minds, the theologian needed to know
the language of the original scriptures, and to correct its text, and incidentally, thanks
to the intel-lectual climate created by humanism, Luther was one such theologian. Once the Greek editions had been collated
and compared against Jerome’s Latin Vulgate – in use since Late Antiquity – a number
of discrepancies began to arise, leading to a proliferation of new empha-ses. With this whole new perspective on the word
of God in the Latin West, a perspective which they be-lieved more closely resembled the
Bible’s authors’ initial intentions, it was then only a matter of deter-mining where
the stress ought to go. The proliferation of various reformist traditions
would eventually emerge as a direct result of what words or passages in this newly recovered
text were believed should be emphasized. For example, there are 39 passages in the
Bible used to stress justification by faith alone, and 40 passages typically employed
to defend the Catholic tradition of faith coupled with works. Of course, Luther would not deny the existence
of passages like James 2:17 where we are told “faith without works is dead,” but to
him the emphasis of the gospel message was embodied in verses like Romans 3:28, where
Luther’s translation stressed that “we conclude that man is justified by faith alone,”
that final word being an insertion of his own. Having to defend his translation methods in
1530, Luther justified adding this word ‘alone’ to his translation, in part with reference
to native German idioms, but chiefly in terms of his principle dogma. In Cameron’s words, “the reformer arrived
at his beliefs (through Scripture) and then interpreted and translated Scripture as it
best conformed to those beliefs.” Luther’s first revelation in working with
Erasmus’ Greek had been the proof, borrowed from the earlier philological work of Lorenzo
Valla, that in Matthew 3:1-3 – where a traditional interpretation had understood John the Baptist
to be admonishing the Jews to do penance – he noticed how the nuance of the original Greek
was simply that John was telling them: “change your minds” (metanoeite). By Luther’s day, however, the reading of
metanoeite as an exhortation to penance or conversion had become self-evident tradition. According to Lyndal Roper (Luther’s most
recent biographer), “it seems to have per-suaded Luther that the idea of satisfaction for sin
which Erasmus thought uncivilized was actually against the gospel, and that all forms of
penitential or compensatory behavior were to be identified with the ‘works’ St Paul
had disparaged as a contribution to righteousness.” Through Luther’s emphasis on justi-fication
sola fide (i.e. by gratuitously given grace received in a state of unstriving trust in
God’s mercy), he preached that expiation and satisfaction were irrelevant to one’s
reconciliation with God – God could not be appeased by rituals and operations, which
were deemed no better in His eyes than offerings of mud. Cameron outlines how a concept like ‘grace,’
when defined and expressed specifically in Latin, carried along with it a whole set of
etymological baggage of its own. It was only once humanist biblical scholars
had demonstrated that the range of meanings in that Latin word were absent from its Greek
and Hebrew equivalents that reformation theologians could begin freely doing away with centuries
of exegeti-cal tradition. Philological corrections of accepted texts
here and there led to the re-evaluation of the au-thenticity of entire books of the Bible
such that even Luther would come to doubt the apostolicity of some of the New Testament’s
later epistles. Most reformers believed Erasmus in his proclamation
that Paul was probably not the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, though they still
regarded its content as inspired and derived from the apostles’ teaching. Though the word held supreme authority, the
very authority of that word now depended on the pronouncements of literary men whose work
could only be verified by others who possessed the same training (i.e. a lifelong interest
in humanist pursuits). As a critical point to his 1985 essay Christianity
and the West 1400-1700, John Bossy emphasizes that since “In the beginning was the Word,”
it should be of no surprise that – especially from this period onward – the rising importance
of the spoken and written word brought along with it the proportional de-valuation of images
and symbols. With the ascent of the word came the devaluation
of the whole collec-tive edifice of church tradition represented by the saints, the sacraments,
and over a thousand years of ‘unwritten’ tradition (i.e. extra-biblical tradition),
in favour of “a naked confrontation with the scrip-tures.” As Cameron is keen to point out, foreshadowing
the more radical reformers and the impending peasant uprisings, “there was always a risk
that unlearned people who read only a small part of the Bible would fly off into realms
of fantasy, and devise exotic new ideas for themselves on the basis of their read-ing,”
which is why the schoolmen had settled the problem in teaching that “implicit faith”
absolved be-lievers of having to know and understand every detail of Church doctrine. In line with the teachings of St Augustine,
simple piety and obedience to the institutional Church would suffice to guarantee eventual
salvation. The northern humanists, on the other hand,
assumed that the Bible could safely be handled by the barely literate in so far as they would
only be able to extract examples of virtues from it; in other words, that they would only
react to the Bible in the same way that educated humanists had. Leading up to his paradigm-shifting ‘discoveries’
(as Moeller calls them), Luther had begun his academic career as a rather average student,
placing 30th out of his cohort of 57 baccalaureates. Though she cannot be certain, Roper believes
it was academic philosophy which initially ignited Luther’s curiosi-ty, even if he
grumbled about being forced to study it. Erfurt University had been a stronghold for
the via moderna (more commonly known as Nominalism), a branch of scholastic philosophy first developed
by William of Ockham in the 14th century. The via moderna had broken away from the via
antiqua of Thom-as Aquinas and Duns Scotus. Among the ranks of Luther’s teachers there
had been “cutting-edge nomi-nalists” who composed textbooks that served as standard
teaching tools. Rooted in a somewhat wayward medieval reception
of classical Platonic and Aristotelian philosophies, the underlying assumption of the via antiqua
was that things were what they were because they were particular occurrences of universal
principles. The nominalists, however – those whose via
moderna would ultimately dissolve the ‘European dream-time’ which a ubiquitous medieval
“Realism” had conjured forth – argued from the assumption that universals were not
real entities, but merely labels (nomina) for particular objects. Roper gives us Luther’s own words, describing
some twenty years later a debate which would have seemed rather abstruse to the new generations:
The dispute and squabble among them was whether the word humanitas, Humanity, and words of
this kind, meant a general humanity, which was to be found in all humans… the Ockhamists
and ‘terminists’ [said] this common ‘Humanity’ is nothing, [rather] it means all humans in
particular. In other words, to the so-called “realist,”
the signifier and the signified are one; to the nominalist, the sig-nifier and the signified
existed as independently (a notion which would have profound implications, espe-cially in
regards to one of the central mysteries of the Catholic Church: the question of transubstantiation;
for what was the Eucharist of high mass once divorced from the reified presence of Christ?). From Roper’s perspective, the influence
of humanism on Luther’s intellectual life is typically overemphasized, as seen in the
way she put more weight upon the influence of nominalist university training, which most
certainly shaped his style of argumentation – but here we see even Luther’s school-teachers
were in some way complicit with the program of humanism:
[Luther] made it clear later that he had been on the side of the Ockhamists who encouraged
critical thinking and stressed the importance of empirical evidence. True to the humanist principle of returning
to the sources, his teachers, Bartholomaeus Arnoldi of Usingen and Jodokus Trutfetter,
used Aristotle’s original texts, not just medieval commentaries on them, and it must
have been dizzying to tackle the works themselves rather than view them through a haze of inherited
comment and glosses. Here we see how Roller emphasizes the impact
of humanism on Luther, but only indirectly. Therefore, we can still see how in Luther
there was combined both the training of the nominalist schoolmen, and the Ad Fontes approach
to humanist learning, whereas the popular humanists of his day with whom he would frequently
exchange correspondence typically did not have a foot in both worlds. As pointed out by Peter Blickle, the great
diversity of thought in “Reformation Theology” would ultimately be derived from all the varied
ways one could interpret Luther’s theology, since its structure was dialectical. It was framed in such sets of paradoxical
antitheses as simul iustus et peccator (“righteous and sinful simultaneously”), “grace and
judgment,” “law and gospel,” “the letter of Scripture and the spirit of Scripture.” Faced with these sets of paradoxes, Luther’s
students and associates found themselves falling on one side of the fence or the other, giving
each individual reformer their own shade of interpretation. This was both the greatest strength and weakness
of Luther’s theology, since it could inoc-ulate individuals without having to force any systems
to a close, but it often led eventual contention and infighting over one disagreement or another
at some point down the line. In Blickle’s words: “the particu-lar moment
a reformer encountered Luther could determine his direction even though Luther’s thinking
might go on developing in completely original paths.” The theological stand-points of each reformer
were determined by their respective inheritance of medieval traditions and their given socio-political
en-vironments. In brief, Blickle has Reformation theology
broken down into three main camps: the Witten-berg theologians surrounding Luther; the “Christian
humanists” around Zwingli, Oecolampadius, and Martin Bucer; and the “theologians of
the Spirit” around Müntzer (Anabaptists and Spiritualists). Whereas the circle around Zwingli and Bucer
would fall on the side of ‘law’ in Luther’s dialectic between ‘law and gospel,’ the
Müntzer group, tinged of by visionary mysticism, would fall on the side of ‘spirit’ in
Luther’s dialectic between ‘the letter and the spirit’ of the gospel. In spite of the fact that from 1517 onward
Luther enthusiastically exchanged letters with human-ists – such that he even began
to sign off his letters to Reuchlin and Erasmus with the humanistically in-spired pen-name
“Eleutherius” (Greek: “the liberated one” and/or “the liberator”) instead
of ‘Martin Luder’ – as far as he was concerned, the pursuits of the humanist were
but a means to an end. From Moeller’s perspective:
“[Luther] had absolutely no understanding of the real heart of humanism, its feeling
for life and its correspondingly high evaluation of man. Thus regardless of exactly how one understands
Luther’s reforming discovery – and opinions on this point are certainly most diverse – it
cannot in any case be deduced from the intellectual world of humanism. Luther’s discovery was more a rejection
of that world. One could better call it a monastic discovery.” Notwithstanding this stress on the university-bound,
monastic character of Luther’s paradigm-shattering ‘discovery,’ Moeller rightly highlights
the enthusiasm which animated the humanists, both young and old, to take up his cause and
message “into town council chambers and into the halls of princes,” and only as
such had Luther finally become “a factor in the calculations of the politicians, although
not on any large scale before 1520.” Among the older generation, from Reuchlin,
Erasmus, Wimpfeling, Zasius, and Pirckheimer, to the younger one, there is hardly a single
humanist who, in those early years, did not have high praise for Luther. Martin Bucer, in his glowing May 1, 1518 report
on Luther’s Heidelberg disputa-tion, wrote to Beatus Rhenanus describing Luther as “one
man [who] seemed to stand out, for what [Erasmus] merely implies, this [Luther] teaches openly
and freely.” Peter Mosellanus, Wolfgang Capito, Crotus
Rubeanus, Beatus Rhenanus, Vitus Amerpachius, and Ulrich von Hutten all praised the fruits
of Luther’s intellectual labours. Even the men who were about to turn against
him bitterly (e.g. Cochlaeus and Fabri) initially received him warmly. There is, therefore, no doubt whatsoever that
it was these hu-manists who played the pivotal role in dragging Luther’s re-emphases, against
his own will, out from the margins of modest Wittenberg and into the hands of Western Europe’s
most powerful men and women. All this to say, in Moeller’s own pointed
words: “No humanism, no reformation.” Moeller is keen to note that in general, there
was really only one characteristic which impressed Luther’s peers unanimously: namely, the
depth of his learning. Even in 1518, historian Franz Irenicus proclaimed
that “among all the Germans, we wanted to honor Martin Luther with the name of standard
bearer on account of the exceptional erudition attained by so great a man.” Moeller notes how the human-ist Bernhard Adelmann,
a canon of Augsburg even went as far as to equivocate the words “learned” with “Lutheran.” Perhaps what allured the humanists most of
all, however, was Luther’s vituperative attacks against the ‘too big to fail’
edifice of scholasticism (though these were more directed at the via antiqua than the
via moderna, at least in his early life). It was this opinion which initially set him
in league with the humanists, sharing in a sense of their solidarity. The most commonly cited example of Luther’s
rejec-tion of scholasticism is in the sentence from his Disputation against Scholastic Theology
(1517), claiming that “all of Aristotle is to theology as darkness is to light”
or, as in a 1517 letter to his friend John Lang, that: “Our theology and that of St
Augustine are advancing very well… Aristotle is gradually declining.” In one particularly colorful passage, published
in his later and more radical Appeal to the Ruling Class (1520), Luther writes:
I cannot avoid believing that the Evil One introduced the study of Aristotle. On the same principles, his book on Ethics
is worse than any other book, being the direct opposite of God’s grace, and the Christian
virtues; yet it is accounted among the best of his works! Oh! Away with such books from any Christian hands. Let no one accuse me of overstating the case,
or object that I do not understand. My dear sir, I know well enough what I am
saying. Aristotle is as familiar to me as to you and
your like. I have read him and studied him with more
understanding than did St Thomas Aquinas or Duns Scotus. Without pride I can make that claim, and if
needs be, prove it. It makes no difference that for centuries
so many of the best minds have devoted their labours to him. Such objections do not affect me as at one
time they used to do. For it is plain as the day that the longer
the lapse of time, the greater the errors which abound in the world and the universities.” Luther would gladly have retained Aristotle’s
books on Logic, Rhetoric, and Poetics (or at least in abridged forms), but only in so
far as they were useful in training young men to speak and preach. It ulti-mately was the marginalia which had
to be dispensed with, such that classical texts could be read in their purest form without
the extraneous commentary. This had been the essence of Erasmus’s project
– to set the “simplicity, purity, and reasonableness of Christianity… against
the life-denying scholastic system with its obscurity and lack of concern for the sources,
and against the narrow-mindedness of its contem-porary representatives.” Above all, Moeller stresses that Luther was
only able to make his scriptural principle understandable (i.e. his rejection of tradition
‘unfounded’ in scripture), in an age that had been primed by and for humanist ideals:
“Such proposals for reform would have been (and were) unintelligible fifty or a hundred
years before Luther.” Whereas the earlier humanists had stressed
an inclusive sense (“not without scripture”), Luther stressed exclusivity (“by scripture
alone”). Naturally, this uneasy alliance between the
doctor of Wittenberg and the humanists was not bound to endure. As Luther’s arguments ripened and matured,
his attacks grew beyond mere theological disputation and began spilling over into criticisms of
Church practice, with little respect to authority except for that which was perceived by others
to be his own. Bit by bit, the older generation of humanists
began to develop a clearer picture of Luther’s more radical character, finally abandoning
him altogether. After 1520, Luther found himself sustained
by the graces of common folk and by politicians, allowing him to begin to cut his final ties
with humanism. As the evangelical movement looked disproportionately
to a hopeful future, the love of antiquity lost much of its appeal, to the extent that
(much to Melanchthon’s dismay), university students began setting aside their humanist
studies en masse. And among the older generation, Moeller maintains,
“the church promised more leisure for studies, perhaps even with the assistance of a nice
benefice, and the peaceful opportunity to purify Christendom through quietly effective,
persistent influence.” The general atmosphere of eagerness to act
in the Reform movement ran counter to the humanists’ unwillingness to overthrow the
old world order by force. By 1519, Erasmus had already been recommending
“civil modesty” to Luther. Mutianus declared, “I for one do not love
the fanatic stone throwers.” In Cameron’s words, the humanists were not,
as a rule, popularizers: “they based their piety on education, learning, and moral self-control,
all of which were essentially elitist principles, neither appealing nor practical for all the
clergy, let alone the people as a whole.” Humanist jurists and politicians remained
especially cold toward Luther. In typically urban and heavily stratified
environments, the moderates found themselves at a loss in kowtowing to radicals. Throughout his survey, Cameron challenges
the assumption that the Reformation inevitably must have happened precisely when it did on
account of some kind of crisis within the Catholic Church; he contests the assumption
that people wanted “the Reformation” as a whole since the evidence rather points toward
the fact that many people did not want it. Indeed, the idea of “reform” was nothing
new: “by 1500 the call for reform of the priesthood had become not a newly recognized
urgent problem, but a well-worn literary cliché” stretching even back to the 12th century. In the end, disillusionment with Catholic
piety and worship were not responsible for mass dissatisfaction with the Church; rather,
it was on account of problems with the Church’s involvement in a great mass of secondary,
bloated administrative roles which garnered a reaction. Cameron lists off a number of popular myths
about the Reformation (“corrup-tion from within”, “the laity versus the Church”,
“a lay spirit in religion”, etc.) and notes that it is only when all heaped together
that these numerous “challenges” appear as though they were bringing the Church to
its knees, hence the ubiquity of chapter or lecture titles that read something like “the
weakness of the Church on the eve of the Reformation.” In reality, the challenges the Church faced
at the time were diverse and fragmented, just like the Church was itself at the time. It was not some monstrous mon-olithic authoritarian
entity. Wary of putting forth anymore essentializing
“grand narratives,” Cameron leaves us with an apt picture of the Reformation as
one seemingly plagued by paradoxes: it was both “an-ticlerical and theocratic, liberating
and disciplinarian, vulgarizing and elitist, and in short, popular and unpopular.” The Catholic reformation he frames as “evolutionary”
and the Protestant reformation as “revolutionary.” In each of their respective Luther biographies,
Bainton, Oberman, and Roper all stressed the un-expectedness of the Reformation, and the
fact that Luther was in no way deliberately trying to spark a revolution, especially given
that he wrote forcefully against those who did (e.g. Against the Murderous Thieving Hordes of Peasants). “The great revolt against the medieval Church,”
Bainton writes, “arose from a desperate attempt [by Luther] to follow the way by her
prescribed.” Luther’s Christology was the same as that
of the Church (Christ was fully man, and fully divine; a problem only to the philosopher,
not to the faithful), and he even maintained the real presence of Christ in the sacrament. In fact, it was over this very difference
in sacramental belief that much of Zwingli’s hostility toward the Catholic clergy was retroprojected
onto Luther: “it was in the urban reformation” Bainton tells us “that long-harbored social
resentment against privileged clerics made real inroads; here is the anticlerical tendency
one searches for vainly in Luther.” It was a thoroughly ‘protestantized’ Luther
from the 19th century imagination, not the real Luther, that completely lost sight of
the Church (though Catholic scholarship has likewise, in its own way, maintained this
“separatist” view). Based on his belief in Sola Scriptura, Luther
was anti-papal, not anti-Church, since it was the institution which had long been considered
the very body which shouldered the head that was Christ. Throughout his life, Luther still engaged
with the writings of the Church Fathers in so far as what they had to say about matters
of scriptural exegesis. It is therefore that Oberman did not paint
a “protestant” or even “political” Luther, despite what others did and believed
in the wake of his disputations. Roper likewise presents us with a Luther steeped
in “social conservatism,” whose final days were dedicated to reaching some kind
of agreement with the “sacramentarians.” Notwithstanding his use of violent language,
all modern biographical accounts of Luther portray him as explicitly anti-violence. Even all this, nonetheless, would not have
been enough to satisfy the criticisms of older generations of humanists. It is again important to consider Schöffler’s
note that virtually all of the humanists who continued to flock to Luther’s banner after
his break with the Church were younger than him, while the venerable members of the older
generation (Erasmus, Reuchlin, Zasius, Wimpfeling, Pirckheimer, and Peutinger), each gradually
turned their backs to Luther. Moreover, while all the reformers tended to
be young, not all young humanists joined the Reformation.” Anxieties about the future that the Reformation
might bring did not disturb the younger humanists; on the contrary, it was the very struggle
against the old order which the younger generation found so attractive in the first place. Moeller tells us that Luther taught this younger
generation “that criticism of Romanism could have a much more profound basis than humanist
ideas and that one could turn from mere criticism to constructive renewal.” The young humanists em-braced not merely Luther’s
project for reform, but also the fundamental notion that man is free to act through faith
in the forgiveness of God – an idea which would come to have dangerous ramifications
by the time it reached the ears of the peasants leading up to their great revolt of 1525. Turning now to the work of Peter Blickle,
The Revolution of 1525, first published in German in 1977 (then soon after translated
by Thomas A. Brady Jr. and Erick Midelfort in 1981), we must focus our attention on the
development of a new mindset which would be used not by university theologians and the
frequenters of princely courts, but by the common German peasant in forming a mass movement
against the ever intensifying strictures of the feudal order. Blickle concentrated his attention on the
reform-inspired Twelve Articles (written by humanists) to map out the socio-economic and
political background of the revolution of 1525. For Blickle, the best way to understand the
revolution was to lay out its goals: we are told that “by basing their demands on the
Bible, the Twelve Articles constructed an alternate framework and thus pointed a way
out of the late medieval crisis, which had become a social and political crisis as well
as an agrarian one.” Though it was an entirely unintended consequence,
the combined ef-forts of Luther’s nominalism and the humanists’ revival of the ancient
world (including the biblical world) through philology and print, helped to foster the
idealization of a new utopian world order, believed by “the murderous thieving hordes
of peasants” to be able to overturn an economic crisis which had slowly been forming since
the aftermath of the Black Death c. 1350: Godly law, as the peasants understood the
Bible, paralyzed the old law and custom and thus gave the rebels their first real opportunity
to break out of the continuity of medieval legal and intellectual traditions. Insofar as godly law was derived from evangelical
preaching and from the Reformation pamphlet, the theology of the Reformation assumes a
position of great importance for the revolutionary movement of 1525. To be sure, the peasants were original in
giving an imperative urgency to godly law when applied to the conditions of this world,
but we do know that the Reformation also provided legitimacy for the peasants’ demands. From this the question immediately arises
to what extent Reformation theology and/or humanist ethics affected goals of rebels in
1525. Among the labels and names used by the radicals,
alongside their organi-zational structures and ideals of legitimacy, Blickle notes how
there are two different ways in which these could be explained: on one hand, they represented
a break with what they perceived as the twisted and spoiled traditions of a distant past;
while on the other, they marked a new starting point “toward the radical realization of
a political and social order corresponding to the will of God” in an idealized future. To Blickle, however, it was not humanism or
the reform movement itself which directly caused such an up-rising, instead it was the
restrictions associated with serfdom that he considers the most important of their grievances,
both quantitatively and qualitatively (a fact derived by looking at grievance lists from
Upper Swabia). He notes how hunting, fishing, and lumbering
restrictions featured in 81% of these lists, meaning again that this turmoil was primarily
the result of a crisis in agriculture – in these peasants’ ability to sustain their
existences in the face of ever multiplying prohibitions – not necessarily based on
a problem with the institution of landlordship itself. Nevertheless, it was through the principles
of “community, elections, godly law, the common good, and Christian brotherly love”
that peasants, burghers, and miners justified themselves in overriding the specific interest
of other groups or estates. The purported goal of their programs was “to
shape the world exactly according to the will of God, to actualize the message of Christ
laid down in the New Testament, and thus to secure eternal salvation.” It is certain that the ‘Wit-tenberg school’
of Reformation theology wanted nothing to do with such utopian ideations, and the vio-lence
needed to implement them, but the notion of exploiting the gospel and bringing it to bear
upon the political order was intimately linked with the goals of the Christian humanists
in southern Germany, Blickle tells us. As far as Zwingli was concerned, though Christ
was certainly considered wholly human and wholly divine, it was Christ’s divinity
which loomed in the foreground while his humanity stood in the background. This emphasis of Zwingli’s would have various
ramifications, particularly for his idea of how a state ought to be run, and how its ruling
authorities should act. The message from Acts 5:29, “we must obey
God rather than man,” was hotly contested. Whereas for Luther this verse had given him
a clean conscience in his passive resistance to the state over theological debates, Zwingli
extracted from it a complete political program, preaching that “Christian princes need laws
that are not opposed to God; oth-erwise they will not be obeyed, and there will be unrest.” All laws governing the affairs of men, Zwingli
thought, must be rooted in what he considered to be ‘natural law’: “Do unto others
as you would have them do unto you” (Matthew 7:12), or “love your neighbor as yourself”
(Matthew 22:39-40). And if a law prescribed did not fit with this
word of God, it was illegitimate. For Zwingli, natural law and the gospel were
two sides of the same coin, since he believed them derived from the same root: “The law
of nature is nothing but the leadership and guidance of God’s spirit,” though of course,
only true Christians could rightly understand natural law since it was an emanation of God’s
will. From this perspective, it logically followed
that even if secular laws and authorities were desirable (as Luther believed), they
were only so in as far as they were “protecting the good, who don’t really need government
among themselves; and punishing the wicked, thereby leading them to a knowledge of natural
law.” Had Zwingli believed that all the current
lords of the land were actually Christians, he would have not considered himself among
the ranks of the reformers at all. “The old laws,” he claimed, needed to
be vetted (by reform-minded humanist preachers of course) to ensure that “they conform
to God’s law of neighbor and of nature.” This was a radical philosophy, and in most
cases it implied the need for a complete recodification of territorial law, particularly in the form
of drafting of new ordinances. In this way, the office of preacher and of
magistrate became inextricably intertwined: “The church was obligated to the state,
and the state to the church.” In the formulation of this Christian state,
through the prescription of natural law, and through making community his organizing principle,
Zwingli forged a constitutional foundation that was largely indistinguishable from the
revolutionary peasants’ aims around 1525. Luther, on the other hand, had no desire to
promulgate this idea that the state relied on its Christian virtue for legitimacy, since
over and above the message in Acts 5:29 he emphasized the message of Matthew 22:21: “Render
unto Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and unto God the things that are God’s.” It was in light of all this that Luther wanted
nothing to do with the composition of new secular ordinances. At the other end of the spectrum, however,
Thomas Müntzer widely proclaimed that, given the imminence of the eschaton and Christ’s
re-turn to judge the living and the dead, the binding power of worldly laws was rapidly
loosening. By the time of the mass riots and revolts
of 1525, we can see how the largely anti-humanist char-acter of the radical reform movement
had fully overwritten the early movement’s more ambivalent per-spective. Across Western Europe, the first discernable
sign that a dramatic reconceptualization of Christi-anity was underway was the outright
rejection of the saints. Mobs, whether sanctioned by public authori-ties
or not, wandered about systematically vandalizing the saints’ images painted on canvas or
carved in marble, wood, or stone. According to Bossy, “where this was not
simple philistinism, it represented a pro-test against the humanization of the social universe
effected in traditional belief by the reconciliation of man and God” [emphasis added]. In as much as saints were believed to share
in God’s divinity, by that much they were despised. They were the very embodiments of the belief
in meritorious sacrifice, and the concomitant belief that this merit could be imparted from
one human to another. Bossy describes how Thomas More sensed a personal
hatred laying under the surface of reformist talk about idolatry, and “would not have
been surprised by the mutilation, eye-gouging, face-battering, decapitation, and gibbeting
to which the statues in Netherlands churches, including those of Christ, were subjected
in 1566.” For him there could be no clearer evidence
of the reformers’ erroneous belief that the people had been taking statues to be the
very saints themselves. It did not take long for the iconoclasts to
find justification either, since God’s unwillingness to avenge his alleged friends, and their incapacity
to avenge themselves, was as great a testimony of their inefficacy as any. Rome certainly got the message, and took some
time to reformulate its official stance. Bossy tells us it gradually adopted the specifically
humanist notion that “a saint was a model of virtue rather than a friend or benefactor,
and presented heroic figures for public wonder or imitation, not for private affection. The large gestures of the baroque saint were
made towards an audience of thousands, not to the kneeling donor or the old woman lighting
her candle.” Bernini’s St Teresa in the throes of ecstasy
was too “far gone” to instill intimacy or encourage reciprocity, while Caravaggio’s
dead Virgin “too close for com-fort.” And so it was that protestant distaste for
images overemphasizing human piety in favour of the “unfettered sovereignty of God”
that redirected the emphasis of Catholic devotion toward new objects, such as the Holy Family
or the Sacred Heart. In hindsight, it was the printing press which
could be said to have had the most deleterious effect upon sacred images as it did upon rituals
and symbols, even if the press itself was a manufacturer of images. “Deprived of other sustenance for the visual
sense,” writes Bossy “Protestants feasted their eyes on these.” John Calvin (1509-1564), whose first scholarly
work was a commentary on the Stoic philosopher Seneca’s De Clementia, and who subsequently
wrote theology with an all too humanist elegance, had consciously experimented with this new
medium of the printed word, improving upon and reorganizing his Institutes with each
successive edition in both Latin and French. As he tells us himself, Calvin learned as
he wrote, and one of the things he learned was that “the order of matters proper to
the lecture-room was not necessarily the right order in a work of art,” providing us a
sense for how – even in spite of the Reformation’s general devaluation of the human-centric worldview
– humanist values endured, even if reluctantly, or only unconsciously, among the works of
later 16th century reformers. It is for this reason that Philip Benedict,
in his most recent survey of Calvinism, emphatically claims that “the Reformation” cannot be
framed simply as a mere reaction against central features of late medieval religiosity, since
it also constituted “the continuation and intensification of trends in religious life
that had gained strength during the waning Middle Ages.” It is, then, “no accident that later Reformed
histories began the story of the Reformation not with Luther’s protest against indulgences,
but with the humanist recovery of the Gospel, and included Girolamo Savonarola and Jan Hus
among the prophets of the true faith.” It is for this reason also, in rejection of
the old paradigms of periodization which exert a great amount of control over how we conceptualize
of history, that Bossy wrote not of “decline” and “Reformation” but of “traditional
Christianity” and “Christianity translated.” In his magisterial treatment of the 16th century
Protestant inner life, Alec Ryrie offers us one final penetrating insight, namely, what
aspect of humanism was most reviled in spirit of the Reformation. Ryrie described how the main affront to early
Protestant emotions was not a product of the Middle Ages, but Antiquity’s now revived
suspicion and contempt for emotion. The perception which Greek philosophy had
had of the emotions was as animalistic and sub-intellectual; such a perception crystalized
just before the advent of the Christian era into both Stoicism and Epicureanism, which
in their own ways aspired to overcome emotions altogether (incidentally a critical ingredient
in setting the foundations for a takeover by Christian ethics). Humanist scholars from the 15th century onward
had zealously revived Stoic and Epicurean philosophies, but not uniformly, and often
not instead of Christianity, but as an addendum for the improvement of the philosophia Christi
and its gentlemanly lifestyle. As the world of secular philosophy buzzed
with these newly revived ancient teachings, Ryrie explains how Christian humanists (whether
Protestant or Catholic) were more likely to revel in their passions than to stifle them:
Erasmus derided Stoic views on the passions as monstrous, and later Protestants – Calvin
included – were outspoken in their agreement. The stoic ideal cultivated indifference in
the face of pain or loss. But for Calvin, and many others, Jesus Christ’s
anguish in his Passion proved not only that such feelings were legitimate, but also that
suffering in Christ’s service was of positive value for Christians. It taught reliance on God and compassion for
others. Emotion was not a hindrance: it was a tool. This attitude differed not only in degree,
but in kind from that which came before it (i.e. the medieval Catholic scholastic view
of the emotions as appetites to be tamed, or the Aristotelian view of them as pas-sions
to be tempered and subordinate to the higher faculties). As encapsulated by one pithy aphorism, Protestantism
was ultimately enamoured by humanisms historical consciousness and its practice of phi-lology,
but by and large it could do without the Renaissance’s more strictly ‘secular’ philosophical
fruits: “I would not bee a Stoick to haue no Passions… but a Christian, to order those
I haue.” To the point of becoming a cliché, it is
often said of Luther that, in so far as his spirit was con-cerned, he lived out the remainder
of his days with one foot still caught in the Late Middle Ages. By the time Luther came into the world, in
1483, only fifteen years had elapsed since Gutenberg’s death, and printed pamphlets
and books had only just begun to circulate. Modern science as we know it today was hardly
yet born, since by the end of Luther’s life, Galileo’s birth was still eighteen years
to come. In his latter days, word arrived to him that
a Polish clerk named Copernicus had issued a book allegedly disman-tling the Ptolemaic
system inherited from Ancient Greece by proving that the earth revolved around the Sun. Copernicus’ only disciple, the mathematician
Rheticus (1514-1574), was a prominent member of the Wittenberg faculty who had helped with
the publication of his master’s On the Revolutions of the Heaven-ly Spheres. Luther was impressed least of all, denouncing
Copernicus as that “fool [who] wishes to revo-lutionize the whole science of astronomy,”
despite the fact that “as the Holy Scriptures show, Joshua commanded the sun to stand still,
not the earth.” Though later Lutherans would fast adopt Copernicus’
model, Luther’s own worldview was pre-Copernican in every conceivable sense. His intellectual center was not the felt presence
of first-hand experience as it generally is for the modern world (an idea inci-dentally
first ushered in by the humanists of the Italian Renaissance), but the weight and authority
of Scripture, around which all things human and divine seemed to revolve. As monk, scholar, and reformer, what was significant
for Luther was neither the make-up of nature nor the development of worldly history – all
such things were vanity. Rather, what remained significant to Luther
until his dying day was the warnings of the prophets, the wisdom of the Proverbs or Psalms,
the divine revelation of godly law in the gospels, and path to salvation laid out in
the Pauline epistles. One of the chief components emphasized by
John Bossy’s “Christianity Translated” underlines the idea that, if anyone did, it
was the Protestants, even more so than the preceding humanists, who “con-verted present
community into historical solidarity with past and future.” Theirs was a newly linear, temporalized worldview,
wherein the small community of true Christians battled back against the “princi-palities,
against [the] powers, [and] against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual
wick-edness in high places.” This was especially so as many found themselves
irresistibly attracted to the millenarian message lifted from the Book of Revelation,
with the arrow of time linearly pointing all of mankind to one impending Final Judgment. While the Apocalypse of St John had in no
way been a fa-vourite of the Protestant founding fathers, who rightly feared the consequences
of an obsession with it; this was an experience made only possible by its mass dissemination
through print and the flurry of its unbridled interpretations which followed. In conclusion, we have seen how before Berndt
Moeller’s time, the common opinion in scholar-ship was that humanism had no significance for
the Reformation, a claim which has been proven here, or so I hope, to be patently false. Humanists were among the first to approve
of Luther’s message, embold-ening him with the confidence of an enduring following. It was they who turned his cause into a wide-spread
movement, and without support from the humanists, Luther would have failed in standing up against
the Church where so many others had failed before. We have seen how historical narratives often
pitted medieval scholasticism, humanism, and Reformation theology against one another,
but in re-ality, how these spheres of knowledge were not mutually exclusive, and often found
themselves co-existing in one body, such as that of Martin Luther, or of John Calvin. We have seen how humanist studies set the
scene for the Reformation and its concomitant peasant revolts by emphasizing the purity
and pristineness of a long-gone past, and consequently, by popularizing a vision of
an idealized utopian future rooted in godly law (especially as seen in the works of Peter
Blickle and Thomas Brady, Jr.). Despite this, we have also seen how (as argued
by Lyndal Roper) we ought not to overemphasize the humanism of Martin Luther, and accordingly,
the direct ties between the northern humanists and the latter stages of the reform movement. We saw how most of the humanists (particularly
the older generation) were generally moderates, Catholics, and well-entrenched in the courtly
life and cities of the Holy Roman Empire, and as such, it did not take them long to
break away from Luther as they increasingly perceived his ideas (and their supporters)
to be unhinged, unchecked by any sense of proper authority, and a visible danger to
the fragile makeup of society. 