 Welcome back one and all to this miniseries
on the historiography of Western Esotericism – or as I said last time, the history of
the history of Western Esotericism. Basically I’ve put this talk together as a means for
myself to sort out some of the dialogues going on within academia in regards to Western Esotericism.
Lots of people complain that academics are off speculating in their ivory towers, never
bringing anything to the public and getting caught up in their own fancies – well the
fact is, their books are just as accessible as anyone else’s (despite being on the pricier
side), but you’re definitely getting more bang for your buck. In any case, the problem
isn’t getting to the books, the problem is getting to the journal articles, which
are generally behind a pay-wall. Well I don’t want anyone who actually cares to feel left
out – I think if academics make their work too inaccessible then they can’t complain
when non-academics don’t know what the hell they’re rambling on about. So, here I am
trying to do justice to the debates in the literature.
Before jumping in, I will give a very brief overview of the field, because it’s relatively
new, and if you want to get your toes wet, you’ll need a few names – I’m drawing
most of this information from Chiara Ombretta Tommasi’s article “Some Reflections on
Antique and Late Antique Esotericism”. The history of Western Esotericism is a relatively
new field within the academy – it can be traced back to Dame Frances Yates (who, if
I’m not mistaken worked from the Warburg Institute), and Francois Secret, who was the
first to hold the chair of ‘Christian Esotericism’ at “l’Ecole pratique des Hautes Etudes”
in 1964. Furthermore, there was Eugenio Garin and Enrico Castelli, who were chiefly Renaissance
scholars looking at the interaction of pagan culture with Christian society – the problem
is that they conceived of the influence from Antiquity as a kind of long, golden, unbroken
chain. Now studying esotericism in Italy during the 1960s was difficult, because neither the
Italian Communist Party nor the Catholic Church wanted anything to do with this “superstitious”
scholarship, and exerted a deep influence over the academy. Now I think it’s obvious
why the Catholic Church is not interested, what with Esotericism being a foothold of
Satan and all – but with the Communist party, the disdain stemmed from their Materialist
biases: what good could come from a collection of such irrational ideas as magic, alchemy,
or astrology. Now the 1960s weren’t that long ago, and some of these prejudices remain
since – after all – materialism is still the standard worldview of the academician.
Now in the 80s this started to change, and we start seeing a new crop of scholars emerging,
one of these being Wouter Hanegraaff, the current appointee of the History of Hermetic
Philosophy and Related Currents in Amsterdam – other big names in the field are Antoine
Faivre and Kocku Von Stuckrad. I think the 1960s, the New Age, LSD, and Post-Modernism
served to soften everyone’s hearts in regards to studying such ostensibly “nonsense”
material – and of course, this is a good, not a bad thing. Now here we start seeing
a real acceleration in the quantity of quality publications, but one idea starts to emerge,
and that is that (etymology aside) esotericism is to be understood as a body of “rejected
knowledge” – obviously the more traditional “Otherness” also comes to mind – Esotericism
is a kind of “significant other” of post-Enlightenment identities. Now this differed from the way
Antoine Faivre had done things, which was more so to circumscribe Esotericism with fixed
characteristics (or “correspondences”): [quote] “i) the presence of symbolic or
real correspondences between beings within the universe, such as the idea of macro- and
microcosm, or the doctrine of astral influences); ii) “living nature” (i.e. envisioning
nature as endowed with its own life force, which is declined in a plural or complex form);
iii) “imagination” (in the form of tools that provide access to a superhuman realm,
by means of rituals, symbolic images, mandalas, intermediary spirits; and iv) “transmutation”
(that is, the spiritual experience of transformation typical of the attainment of gnosis). [And
then] To these he added two more secondary characteristics: “concordance” ( root
from which all world religions and spiritual practices stem) and “transmission” (the
idea that esoteric disciplines can be taught by a master to a disciple). Now the problem
here is that what happens when the particular strand of occult gobbledygook you’re reading
doesn’t fit into all these categories? Does that mean that it doesn’t fit the mould
of Western Esotericism? How useful are these circumscriptions if they are not universal
to all disparate branches of Esotericism? Naturally, something had to be done to make
“Western Esotericism” more flexible of a label, not just a bunch of disparate strands
held together by virtue of a scholar who likes lumping more than splitting...
Alright well, with that out of the way, the first article I want to examine is called
“The problems of rejected knowledge: thoughts on Wouter Hanegraaff’s Esotericism and the
Academy” by Marco Pasi Passi opens up his discussion by first summarizing
the thesis of Wouter Hanegraaff’s ‘Esotericism and the Academy’ and here’s what he says:
“[that] the concept of Western esotericism has its roots in the ancient-wisdom narrative
that takes shape in the intellectual cauldron of Late Antiquity and which is revived in
the Renaissance through authors such as Marsilio Ficino and Giovanni Pico della Mirandola.
Later, this ancient-wisdom narrative mutates into a negative model, starting especially
from the 17th century, when it is adopted by Protestant theologians who use it in the
framework of their anti-apologetic agenda. This model, with all due adjustments, then
becomes a tool to conceptualize what these authors perceived as the inﬁltration, throughout
the centuries, of Pagan beliefs and ideas into the original purity of the Christian
message. Slightly later, from the late 17th century on, an alternative theological model
of conceptualization of these various heterodox currents as a single phenomenon emerges, in
this case perceived again in a positive light. This model is not based on the ancient-wisdom
narrative, but is rather inﬂuenced by Pietism and ‘is grounded in the centrality of direct,
unmediated, personal experience of the divine’. This model is also soon opposed by a negative
one, which is the by now increasingly secular model of the Enlightenment, based on the idea
that these phenomena – corresponding to what we now call Western esotericism – are
none other than manifestations of ‘superstition’ and ‘human folly.’ According to Hanegraaff
all these models had a long fortune in the history of Western culture and are essential
to understanding the origins of the concept of Western esotericism, its historical development,
and the ideological interests it has served. Hanegraaff claims in fact that these models,
far from disappearing completely in the sands of history, are at the origin of some basic
approaches not only to the study of esotericism, but even more generally to the study of religion,
which have been prominent in the landscape of 20th-century scholarly research. In other
words, Hanegraaff sees the model based on personal experience of the divine as the distant
progenitor of the so-called ‘religionist’approach, whereas the Enlightenment approach based on
ridiculing superstitions would be (although I do not see this stated explicitly in the
book) at the origin of a reductionist approach. Predictably, for those who are familiar with
his previous works, Hanegraaff makes it clear that both these approaches are problematic,
because they are based on positions that are ideological rather than empirical and essentially
non-historical’” – end quote. Alright, so now we’re on some firmer footing
in regards to what we’re actually talking about, which is the grand narrative of Western
Esotericism, as explained to us by Wouter Hanegraaff. Now the problem that Marco Passi
has with this approach, is that, like many recent books that cover themes which are close
to Western esotericism (like ‘gnosticism’ or ‘magic,’) it shifts the focus away
from the object of study in and of itself (which tends to be softened in order to eliminate
all risks of ‘essentialism’), and moves it toward a historiographical analysis of
how this object has been traditionally conceptualized, constructed, and therefore quote-unquote ‘essentialized.’
(p. 204) So, in other words, what Passi is saying is that Hanegraaff sets up an umbrella
term that doesn’t actually exist as a concrete thing in history, then starts putting a bunch
of historical events or ideas and puts them under the umbrella and says: “Behold! Western
Esotericism” without actually giving a definitive criteria of what gets let in and what doesn’t.
It’s kind of like a form of putting the cart before the horse. I myself am guilty
of doing this with the Encyclopedia Hermetica, for example, whereby I haven’t so much been
looking at Hermeticism directly, so much as what I consider to be its constituent parts.
This is, in a sense, a historical faux-pas. Now, I didn’t put the Encyclopedia Hermetica
together with the same level of rigor that I would have applied to a scholarly publication,
it’s more of a primer for people to get their feet wet, so it’s not really begging
for this type of scrutiny – Hanegraaff doesn’t get off so easily, however. And that’s the
name of the game: publish or perish, and have your work ripped apart by others who are also
living by the same maxim. I should add that I’m pretty sure all or most of these scholars
are friends in real life, so if anything seems overly vicious, know that everything is said
in good faith. Now another point Passi raises regards Hanegraaff’s
use of the term ‘Platonic Orientalism’ (which we explored in much detail in the last
lecture). Passi says this, and I quote, “When discussing the model of the ancient-wisdom
narrative, Hanegraaff introduces this term and explains that it is useful to indicate
the widespread idea [emphasis is mine] in ancient Greek culture that religious wisdom
did not have indigenous origins, but had been imported from ‘barbarian,’ i.e., non-Greek,
sources. Hanegraaff points out that ‘Platonism understood as ancient “divine wisdom derived
from the Orient” is precisely what characterizes the currents and textual traditions under
discussion here, and this fact has long been known to specialists’ (Hanegraaff 2012:
15). The term ‘Platonic Orientalism’ is therefore used throughout the book to indicate
this particular concept, which is not limited to Antiquity, but ﬁnds a new life with the
Renaissance (with ﬁgures such as Gemistos Plethon). While the underlying notion of ‘ancient-wisdom
narrative’ seems to me to be a very important, useful tool, I ﬁnd the term ‘Platonic
Orientalism’ rather problematic for several reasons. First of all, Hanegraaff is borrowing
here a concept that was in my view already problematic and confusing in the way it was
deﬁned by John Walbridge, who ﬁrst proposed it. At the beginning of his [book] Wisdom
of the Mystic East, where he explains his usage of the term, Walbridge points out that
Suhrawardī’s project of reviving ‘the wisdom of ancient Iran’ can be better understood
as deriving from a form of ‘Orientalism,’ which is ‘a more general fascination with
ancient wisdom of all kinds’. He then adds that ‘this Orientalism is best understood
as a perennial Platonic trait’ Walbridge cannot then avoid referring brieﬂy to Edward
Said (Said 1978), whose Orientalism he criticizes on the whole, but from whom he is willing
to borrow the idea of a ‘romantically conceived’ Orient, made of ‘unchanging, fuzzily conceived
exotic ancient lands of wisdom, spices, and fabulous kings’. Walbridge therefore applies
this notion of ‘Orientalism’ as ‘perennial Platonic trait’ to Suhrawardī, in trying
to understand ‘his veneration of the ancient Orient of Hermes, of the ancient Persian sages
of legend, and of India’. The question that is not asked in the book, and therefore also
never answered, is whether the ‘Orient’ we are talking about is Suhrawardī’s Orient
or rather our own. Does Suhrawardī’s have any concept of a ‘romantic East’ of his
own, or are we projecting ours onto him? In what sense could the ‘ancient Persian sages’
be ‘Oriental’ for an author such as Suhrawardī who is also a Persian? And in what sense would
Egypt be ‘Oriental’ if – at least geographically speaking – it would actually be a Western
land for him? Edward Said’s famous Orientalism described a phenomenon which, even if it has
its roots in the past, is essentially modern.” (p. 206) – end quote.
Now I think this is pretty legitimate criticism, but I can hear Hanegraaff in my head right
now saying “I am not talking about Said’s Orientalism” and such are the dangers implicit
in using a loaded word – you’re going to constantly be swatting people away who
are trying to get you to talk about Said. Now, here I’m going to let Hanegraaff speak
for himself – here’s what he says in his article (in the same journal) in response
to criticisms against his use of the term Platonic Orientalism:
“If I understand them correctly, their objections are ultimately based on the assumption that
such a term implies an essentialized category of ‘the Orient.’ Such an essentialization
of ‘East versus West’ is, as they point out, a 19th–20th century phenomenon (heavily
indebted, of course, to evolutionist and colonialist narratives) and therefore leads to anachronistic
distortions if projected back onto Late Antiquity or the Renaissance. With this I fully agree
– a rejection of essentialism and present-centered historiography runs like a red thread through
my book – but the point is that ‘Platonic Orientalism’ as I deﬁne it is not necessarily
or inherently related to any belief in an essentializing East–West distinction. For
instance, I do not imply that an author such as Numenius saw the ‘peoples of high renown’
(the Brahmans, Magi, Egyptians, and Jews) to whom Plato was indebted as parts of one
essential unity of ‘Oriental’ thought, opposed to an equally uniﬁed ‘Occident’
represented by the mindset of Greece and Rome: this is indeed a modern projection. But I
do claim that those ancient nations, which geographically just happened to lie in the
east, were all categorized as ‘barbarian’ nations by the Greeks, because of their languages;
and that the strange and unfamiliar customs of these distant peoples lent them a certain
aura of mystery that could in still fear or fascination, or both. None of this is controversial,
as far as I know; but most importantly, none of it implies an essentialization of ‘the
Orient’ as a monolithic whole… However, it is indeed true (and perhaps this is what
creates the confusion) that the entire ancient-wisdom narrative is grounded in a powerful rhetoric
of unity and essence: not necessarily a unity and essence of the Orient as such, however,
but certainly one of divine wisdom and revelation. In sum: that divine wisdom had reached us
from some mysterious place in the east does not need to imply that it had come from the
east. I understand and appreciate that the legacy of (post) colonialism has caused an
extreme sensitivity towards any term that has ‘Orient’ or ‘Orientalism’ in it,
but I believe we should not allow ourselves to be held hostage forever, in our terminological
choices, by the long shadows of scholars such as [Franz] Cumont or [Edward] Said, or for
that matter by postcolonial discourse. The latter may have tended to claim a monopoly
over the term ‘Orientalism,’ but in fact it is doubtful whether the supposedly universal
notion of a reiﬁed ‘East’ versus ‘West’ was ever so universal even in the 19th century.
Therefore I reserve the right to deﬁne ‘Platonic Orientalism’ in a precise and non-essentialist
manner if this helps me better understand what was going on in Late Antiquity or the
Renaissance.” (p. 260) [End Quote] Now one of the reasons I’m letting these
guys speak for themselves is that they have a much clearer understanding of what they
mean, and can elucidate it in as few words as possible without muddying the picture.
I don’t know about you, but that’s about as clear a rebuttal as any – so let’s
carry on in this fashion going back and forth between criticisms and answers.
Next up we’ve got the article “Some reﬂections on Wouter Hanegraaff’s Esotericism and the
Academy” by Giovanni Filoramo Now one of the chief criticisms levied by
Giovanni Filoramo is not all too different from Marco Passi’s – it concerns Hanegraaff’s
use of the label “Platonic Orientalism” instead of something more traditional like
“gnosis.” Many of his concerns are addressed in the response I just gave in quoting Hanegraaff
(who wrote that response to answer not only Passi’s criticisms, but Filoramo’s aswell),
but I should at least do him justice and present some of what he said:
[Quote] “In order to highlight the problematic nature of the category of ‘Platonic Orientalism,’
it sufﬁces to take the example of the way in which the category of ‘oriental religions
and cults’ – introduced a century ago by Franz Cumont – has been deconstructed
in the last 20 years. This category – back then certainly innovative – derived, on
the one hand, from a reading of the evolutionary history of religions that tended to see in
Christianity the culmination of polytheism, and on the other hand, from a ‘colonialist’
vision of a strange and alien East, both fascinating and disturbing... Against this background,
the category of ‘Platonic Orientalism’ raises issues: what exactly was meant by ‘the
East’ at the dawn of the 4th century CE? The operation carried out by authors such
as Porphyry and Iamblichus – certainly of paramount importance in the construction of
the ancient concept of prisca theologia – intended to merge the most diverse aspects of the countless
religious traditions of the empire, regardless of their geographical location. For an author
so signiﬁcant in this tradition as the Emperor Julian, what mattered was the unity of Greek
paideia, which he intended to restore in his own way, against the threat posed by a typical
Eastern religion such as Christianity… The Christian and pagan authors mentioned by Hanegraaff,
from Celsus to Porphyry and Eusebius, are all, in terms of geography and language, Oriental.
But what unites them beyond the obvious differences of faith is not this, but rather the transformation
of philosophy – already attested to by the middle of the 2nd century and featuring common
elements in authors such as Justin and Celsus – from a rational search for truth based
on dialog and confrontation, into a way of life rooted in an ageless, primordial revelation.
(p. 214) [End Quote] So this is a serious criticism, namely, “what
do modern colonial categories have to tell us about Late Antiquity” – Hanegraaff
admits this is problematic, but he also reminds us that the entire ancient-wisdom narrative
is definitely grounded in a powerful rhetoric of unity and essence: not necessarily a unity
and essence of a reified and monolithic Orient, but the unity and essence of revelation itself
– so he posits that the idea that divine wisdom had reached the Greeks from some mysterious
place in the east does not need to imply that it had actually come from the east, but that
it came as an idealistic package. Now I don’t know if this qualifies as moving the goalpost,
but by and large he also thinks people are just too sensitive about the word Orientalism.
Now… before moving on to some different criticisms, I’d like to quote something
Filoramo writes – and I think this is his closing nod of approval that, despite his
criticisms, Hanegraaff does great work – this is what he says:
Without embracing a religionist and essentialist thesis, one can still work with a historicist
perspective, being aware of the existence of forms of thought that can pre-exist their
historical manifestations, without having to assume an ontological or metaphysical foundation.
(p. 219) So, in other terms what Filoramo’s saying
is that despite all the criticism he gives, he believes that we actually can, without
having to “go native” and become die-hard believers or out of control idealists, explore
different peoples from different periods of history on their own terms while still using
guiding principles like “Platonic Orientalism” or “Western Esotericism” without having
to justify them as concretely “real” things – and I think Hanegraaff’s work is proof
of that. Alright, well moving on – the next article
is called (and I love this title) “Discourse theory trumps discourse theory: Wouter Hanegraaff’s
Esotericism and the Academy” by Bernd-Christian Otto. This one is particularly interesting
because it’s quite different from the first two critiques. What this article does is claim
that Hanegraaff’s problem is that he sees himself as a historian, but in reality, he’s
just one of those filthy post-modernist Foucault-worshipping “discourse theoreticians” (Bahhh! …I
jest). To Otto, this is not an insult… but to a proud historian (especially one with
a distaste for po-mo lit-crit), it stings. In his own words, Otto writes:
“…that the author is not willing to classify his own approach as such is explained with
recourse to his dispute with Kocku von Stuckrad, who, according to Hanegraaff, would embody
discourse theory, whereas Hanegraaff would embody history. A comparison of Hanegraaff’s
Esotericism and the Academy: Rejected Knowledge in Western Culture (Cambridge University Press,
2012) and von Stuckrad’s Locations of Knowledge in Medieval and Early Modern Europe: Esoteric
Discourse and Western Identities (Brill, 2010) reveals that this is a misleading classiﬁcation
and that Hanegraaff’s study comes closer to what discourse theory is all about. As
a consequence, Esotericism and the Academy is the very ﬁrst study on ‘Western esotericism’
that offers a convincing justiﬁcation of this particular label as an overarching discursive
category… He continues:
Even though Hanegraaff himself appears to be cautious while putting the label to use,
he presents overwhelming evidence for the interconnectedness of Western discourses about
Plato, Hermes, Pythagoras, Zoroaster, or Orpheus, about the Chaldeans, Templars, Rosicrucians,
Illuminati, or Theosophers, about magia naturalis, alchemy, astrology, mesmerism, occultism,
or parapsychology from the 15th to the 21st centuries, be they from ‘polemical’ or
‘religionist’ perspectives. Hanegraaff’s fascinating synopsis of the entire ﬁeld
in all its complexity and diversity yields the conclusion that there is a meta-structure
that holds all these seemingly disparate ‘strings’ together. (p. 232)
Now the problem is that Hanegraaff – ostensibly repping the position of the Historian - rejects
von Stuckrad’s claim that only “discourse theory” can solve the riddles endemic in
the concept of ‘Western esotericism. And here’s why, in Hanegraaf’s own words:
“The problem lies in an exclusivist and reductionist subtext that automatically devalues
“contents and ideas” in favor of “structures,” makes history subservient to theory, and ends
up promoting discursive approaches as the only valid methodology in the study of religion,
esoteric or otherwise’ (365)”. In other words, discourse theoreticians force their
work through a filter, or a mould – they make the sources say what they want them to
say - whereas historians coax their work out of the sources (they listen to what the sources
have to say). But ultimately, I think Otto is invoking that
old Nietzschean maxim that if you battle with monsters you may yourself become one, and
if you stare into the abyss of post-modernism, the abyss of post-modernism stares back into
you. He says: [quote] “Hanegraaff portrays discourse theory
as a rather destructive tool that stands in the way of true historical research. When
applying the method, he claims, ‘it is not just the term “esotericism” that vanishes
as a useful concept, but much of the historical material will vanish as well!’ (365). Finally,
Hanegraaff maintains that history ‘trumps’ theory (as if the two would exclude each other)
and that good historians shouldn’t allow ‘philosophy to paralyze them’ (366). Given
these statements, one is not surprised to see Hanegraaff bashing Foucault in various
instances… Hanegraaff’s monograph systematically implements an observation only alluded to
by von Stuckrad: that basic genres of ‘esoteric discourse’ such as ‘the disciplines of
astrology, alchemy, and magic, [...] have been “distanced away” by what I call the
processes of disjunction since the 18th century’ and thereby functioned ‘as a “signiﬁcant
Other” of post-Enlightenment Western identities’ (von Stuckrad 2010: 200). While von Stuckrad
lacks a systematic elaboration of this phenomenon in his Locations of Knowledge, Hanegraaff’s
Esotericism and the Academy not only offers overwhelming evidence for these ‘processes
of disjunction,’ but also falsiﬁes von Stuckrad’s claim that they started only
in the 18th century. To the contrary, Hanegraaff traces back polemics against the ‘ancient-wisdom
narrative’ to the early 1500s (when, for example, the very nephew of Giovanni Pico
della Mirandola, Gianfrancesco Pico della Mirandola, attempted ‘to destroy what his
uncle had built,’ by means of his Examen vanitatis doctrinae gentium) and convincingly
unveils the complex discursive interconnections between these early polemics against Platonism
and various later polemics against offshoots such as magia naturalis, alchemy, or the ‘occult
sciences’ (164–207). [OK and here is the meat of Otto’s argument] Taking these observations
into account, Hanegraaff’s study could indeed be understood as a genuine discourse analysis
of power relations in regard to the ﬁeld of ‘Western esotericism,’ of the latter’s
construction as the respective ‘other’ of both European religions (mostly Christianity)
and science and, ﬁnally, of afﬁrmative counter-reactions by people who, at some point,
started identifying themselves with these various forms of ‘rejected knowledge.’
So, in other words, “buddy – you’re a discourse theoretician, why you gotta be
such a hater?” As if Hanegraaff would read this and go “Oh GOD I KNEW IT ALL ALONG!
I’M A DEVIANT!” Alright, well in all seriousness, these are
Otto’s accusations – I mean, “observations”: (1) Hanegraaff uses the word ‘discourse’
extensively throughout his work, and he’s not using it in its everyday understanding
of the term (that is, as “dialogue”). Rather, Hanegraaff is getting real buddy-buddy
with Foucault, employing ‘discourse’ as the sum of all statements (generally in texts
for historians) that form “a coherent terminological and argumentative structure” which gives
a kind of flavour to any single given statement formulated in that text – it’s like a
fractal that is self-similar across scales, and yet the whole is ever greater than the
sum of its parts. Otto holds that Hanegraaff’s Esotericism
and the Academy appears as [quote] “the very ﬁrst volume that systematically
addresses the overall issue of power ingrained in the (discursive) ﬁeld of ‘Western esotericism,’
thereby outlining its inherent structure and problematics in a much more elaborate way
than has been done thus far (especially by taking both ‘polemical’ and ‘religionist’
narratives into account). When Hanegraaff writes that history should ‘trump’ theory
(p. 366), he overlooks that his own narrative is the very outcome of theory, namely, of
his systematic adoption and deployment of numerous discourse-theoretical methologems…
That discourses produce their ‘objects’ is one of the essential postulations of Foucauldian
discourse analysis and one is stunned by the fact that Hanegraaff uses formulations very
similar to Foucault’s original phrasing. Hanegraaff’s interpretation of a large number
of authors in Esotericism and the Academy indeed shows his de-essentializing, constructivistic
approach that ﬁnally leads to the claim that ‘“Western esotericism” is an imaginative
construct in the minds of intellectuals and the wider public, not a straight-forward historical
reality “out there”’ (p. 377) Apparently, Hanegraaff’s analysis of discourses
about ‘rejected knowledge’ begins with the early-modern reception (George Gemistos
Plethon, Marsilio Ficino, Pico della Mirandola, and others) of various ancient (mostly Platonic
and Neoplatonic, but also ‘kabbalistic’) textual corpora. Thus, the discursive category
of ‘Western esotericism’ arises, according to Hanegraaff, by means of counter-reactions
to these ‘ancient-wisdom narratives’ and thereby seems to constitute a genuine, if
not unique, aspect of early-modern and modern European history. (p. 239)
Now, this is beautiful criticism, but I must say, Hanegraaff just looked at all this and
said “OK, then I am a historian who uses ‘discourse theory’ as one of the many
tools in my toolkit,” and since, like Otto said himself, the two need not be mutually
exclusive categories (that is, historian and discourse theoretician), then one can (and
should) ideally be both, with the reiteration of the caveat that “history trumps discourse.”
(a statement which obviously Foucault would have rejected).
OK – moving on, we’ve got our last critique, and this one is my favourite. I should say
from the outset, I had a good laugh when I first read this article, because I didn’t
look at who wrote it before I read it, and as I was flipping through the pages I kept
thinking to myself that “It’s easy to think with a Hammer” (in the sense that
it is always easier to tear down than it is to build) – and lo and behold, I check the
name of the author, and it’s Olav Hammer! So there you have a fun little synchronicity
I experienced… now let’s get into what Hammer actually says – so the name of his
article is “Deconstructing ‘Western esotericism’: on Wouter Hanegraaff’s Esotericism and the
Academy.” This introduction is brilliant, but I think
it has issues which I’ll outline later: [quote] “Esotericism and the Academy reminds
me strikingly of a book I once read (and the title of which, at a distance of more than
30 years, now escapes me), dealing with a very different topic: an anthropological study
of business management. Top-level executives of various ﬁrms typically made ad hoc decisions
prompted by the day-to-day activities of their companies. When asked in retrospect how they
had built up their organizations, this rather haphazard meandering was curiously transformed
into the story of long-term visions implemented by means of deliberate management strategies.
The development of a ﬁeld of ‘Western esotericism’ in Hanegraaff’s narrative
is similar: a very diverse set of practices – defended or rejected for very different
reasons by very different groups of people at very different times – ends up constituting
a diffuse ‘something’ with few if any internal characteristics that serve to deﬁne
it. With the exception of some hints at the end of the book, little seems to unite, say,
alchemy, the quest for a hidden macro-history, and astrology, except that some powerful and
trendsetting individuals at various points in time declared that they were vehemently
opposed to all of these pursuits. Historical contingency reigns supreme” (p. 242) [skipping
some pages] …Divergence and semi-arbitrary demarcations are the consequences of seeing
‘esotericism’ as an umbrella concept that slowly emerges when a mass of events are looked
at in hindsight: just like the managers who performed their daily tasks in a rather ad
hoc manner, but saw the outcomes a predictable result of a managerial strategy, ‘esotericism’
is the end result of countless individuals involving themselves in polemics over a number
of wildly diverging topics, and later generations seeing the result as more coherent than is
warranted by the material. (p. 244) Alright, so this is a brilliant analogy, and
I just love how mundane it is too… now my problem with it is this: firstly, can things
not be determined apophatically? Can we not come to know what a thing is by carving away
at what it is not? I think after all, this is ultimately what Hanegraaff is saying when
he refers to “Western Esotericism” as a “waste basket” of ideas. But my main
problem with Hammer’s ideas here are that you can literally apply this deconstruction
to anything: Rome, Platonism, Scholasticism, Chivalry, Islam, whatever – Existence precedes
essence – there is nothing but the sum of ad hoc decisions made in real time, which
are then reconceptualised in hindsight. So why bring it up? Now I say Islam, because
that’s quite literally the example he uses as a counter-point to “Esotericism.” This
is what he says: There seems to be practically nothing that
unites all expressions of ‘esotericism.’ ‘Esotericism’ dissolves into an array
of individual, repeatedly changing elements, utterly malleable across time. I would call
this a consequence of radical historicism, rather than a drawback. This is, nevertheless,
a very different way of deﬁning a religious phenomenon, current, or tradition than one
usually ﬁnds in scholarly literature on religion. Most commonly, despite various disclaimers
suggesting that traditions such as, e.g., Islam or Buddhism, are very ﬂexible and
lack easily identiﬁable core characteristics, some attempt is usually made to nonetheless
deﬁne and delimit the tradition in question. Such deﬁnitional endeavors tend to go in
either of two directions. One approach, the historical, is to identify core historical
events that have shaped all (or nearly all) manifestations of the tradition. For Islam,
that could be the prophetic career of Muhammad, the turbulent events that took place after
his death and involved the identity and leadership of the community of believers, and the emergence
in the brief space of the 9th and 10th centuries of paradigmatic commentarial, theological,
ritual, and legal traditions. Muslims may have widely divergent views of who Muhammad
was, but will agree that he was the fulcrum around which salvation history has revolved.
(p. 242) The other approach is synchronic: a tradition
can on this view be deﬁned by identifying substantive elements that are widely shared
(even if perhaps not universal) at a given point in time. Again for Islam, almost all
self-professed Muslims have at least a nominal acquaintance with the Qur’an, and with even
a modicum of education, will treat a core set of commentarial, theological, and ritual
elements as part of a corpus that needs to be taken into account. Hanegraaff’s approach
seems to acknowledge that neither method is readily applicable to ‘Western esotericism.’
Its elements are widely divergent, to the point of being mutually contradictory, and
arose over the entire span of Western intellectual history, from Antiquity to today, via a process
of historically contingent accretion. Even elements that previous scholarship has attempted
to unite are here sundered: the ‘occult,’ for instance, is in Esotericism and the Academy
deconstructed as a pseudo-category. (p. 243) Now my problem here is that the very deconstruction
he’s applying to Hanegraaff can he applied to deconstruct his deconstruction… he’s
saying Hanegraaff has one way of history, but that this doesn’t match the two modes
(the ‘historical’ and the ‘synchronic’) which he recognizes as legitimate. Now where
this legitimacy emerges from, (tradition? Institutional authority?) I don’t know – what
makes his way of doing history superior – I don’t know. These modes are not justified,
merely prescribed. Why should Hanegraaff, or anyone for that matter, be bound to use
these two modes Hammer suggested? I believe you can press on any definition hard enough
to make it break, but you can do it to anything to the point where you risk breaking the usefulness
of language, leaving us all lapsing into solipsism. Is a nebula not a real thing just because
it is nebulous? Now, let’s accept for a moment that these
two modes, the historical and the synchronic are indeed superior – couldn’t we just
find one of these events or element hinge esotericism off of that? Hammer gives us the
following lists, and pretends as if there isn’t a glaring commonality between all
these things: “the Swedenborgian Church, spiritualism, Jungian spirituality, the Theosophical
Society, the Anthroposophical Society, Gurdjieffinspired groups, the Church Universal and Triumphant,
Wicca and a host of similar neo-Pagan currents, the New Age, several Rosicrucian orders, the
Human Potential movement, occultist magic, various New Thought denominations, Satanism,
several UFO religions, and Traditionalism.” Hammer claims all these are movements that
do not share even a single ritual or doctrine, and that they all function in sociologically
very diverse ways. (p. 243) Well… frankly, I disagree, because to me it’s perfectly
clear that all of these groups are unified, more loosely by the bracket of “Idealists”
but more narrowly by the shared element of gnosis/personal revelation. They may all have
different content within their revelations, but the point is they all believe in the primacy
of first-hand experience of the divine, or “higher wisdom” which is supra-rational,
and not universally (or even popularly) apprehended. Just because Hammer doesn’t see this element,
doesn’t mean it’s not there… so I again, I ask what makes Hanegraaff’s work on Esotericism
any different than a work on “Greek Philosophy” or even “Islam” for that matter – who
sets the criteria on how “tight” or “concrete” these subjects of inquiry need to be before
engaging in them – cuz if it’s self-evident, it isn’t evident to me by the same logic
that is used to deconstruct “Esotericism” – this is a gripe I have with deconstructing
things – when does it stop? And why? Hammer accuses Hanegraaff of “circumscribing,
not defining” – and I wonder if there’s actually a difference when it comes to concepts.
Could Hammer define Islam for me? Or would he circumscribe it? Sure we can define a triangle,
but can we define a collection of ideas? Hammer says himself in defining the two “proper”
modes of historical inquiry, traditional scholars attempt to “define and delimit” these,
but can “Islam” really be pinned down to a pithy definition, or rather can it only
be delimited? (by the way, I’d like to point out that “delimit” and “circumscribe”
effectively mean the same thing here, albeit “circumscribe” is being loaded with a
pejorative sense and used as a reproach to Hanegraaff, whereas “delimit” is being
used with a positive sense. So in the end, I question the usefulness of deconstructing
“Esotericism” if you’re going to give Islam as your example of something scholars
have pinned down concretely. I would love to sit down with Hammer and hash out just
exactly who is, and who is not a Muslim – we’d find it quite difficult to come to any agreement,
but in the end, would we walk away from it saying that Islam must not be a real thing?
Just like Muslims, I think “Esotericists” would disagree on certain points, but by and
large they would all recognize one another as heterodox mystics of one strain or another,
each of whom are in dialogue with a “hidden knowledge or ancient wisdom”, whether it
be traditional in actuality or merely idiosyncratic. I don’t think that’s so nebulous as to
be non-existent. I think another one of my problems is that in these discussions, Esotericism
is being likened to a religion onto itself, and then criticized on those terms – it
is not a religion, it is a pursuit of interiority which can operate within any given religion
(such as Christian Kabbalah, or Islamic Battinism). Esotericism must be understood by what it
is not, and it is not the communal, external dimensions of religion (aesthetics, architecture,
ritual, community binding, festivals, etc.). The reason most Buddhists don’t have much
in common with Buddhist monks is because they aren’t dedicated to the esoteric dimensions
of Buddhism like the monks are… They are monks by virtue of their “esoteric” (part
of an inner circle) interests. In any case, these are MY concerns – and they may or
may not be misguided, and I’m sure Hammer would have some answers, but these would probably
only beg more questions ad absurdum – such is the nature of the game – but in any case
Hanegraaff’s concerns are different. Before switching back to his final words on
the debate, I’ll give one last quotation by Hammer, because I think it’s bang on,
and I think it serves as a warning to us all: [quote] “One reason why the atomism of radical
historicism has gained such a strong foothold in academia more generally is that comparativism
was wielded with indiscriminate gusto by writers such as Eliade, a man specializing in no particular
tradition but willing to draw parallels between all and any, or various post-Freudians [*ahem*
Jung/Campbell *ahem*] who assumed that Procrustean reading could reduce myths from all around
the world to a small set of universal themes. Though it would carry too far and demand too
much space to defend universalizing theories, it is a readily observable fact that there
is in the study of religions once again an increasing readiness to accept wide-ranging,
comparative theories. (p. 246) Alright! Well, let’s wrap this up and move
on to the final article “the power of ideas: esotericism, historicism, and the limits of
discourse” by Wouter J. Hanegraaff. Hanegraaff starts out by setting up a dichotomy
between his critics, between the “pure historicism” approach of Giovanni Filoramo on one side
of the spectrum, and on the other side, Olav Hammer as ‘the theory guy’ (for whom theory
trumps history, not vice-versa). Hanegraaff claims it’s impossible for him to make a
choice for either of these two alternatives, and this is why:
[quote] The reason is that in my way of doing intellectual history, I am essentially a Kantian:
I believe that ideas are empty unless they appear in concrete empirical and historical
realities, and blind unless we pursue their structural logic. Within the dialectics of
that constellation (no theory without empiricism, no empiricism without theory), my work is
source-driven rather than theory-driven: everything begins for me with studying empirical source
materials in as much detail as possible. However, my very understanding of empiricism is informed
by the quintessentially Kantian insistence (prominent also in Max Weber) on the active
role of the knowing subject: there can be no doubt, of course, that theoretical reﬂection
comes into play already before selecting and interpreting sources, or is implicit in that
very activity. (p. 254) [end quote] He continues:
[quote] …Stripped to its very core, my book tries to tell the story of how Christian intellectuals
and their post-Enlightenment heirs have been trying to deal with a problem that could not
be resolved and refused to go away. In its original form, this problem was the presence
of ‘pagan’ Hellenistic speculation in an intellectual culture nominally grounded
in biblical revelation. It constituted a problem because ‘paganism’ could not be wholeheartedly
embraced and accepted, since it stood for the very thing that both Jews and Christians
were supposed to reject, but could not be gotten rid of either, because it happened
to be integral to the very theological fabric on which Christians relied to explain what
they and their religion were all about. I am arguing that the never-ending (because
ultimately hopeless) project of resolving this dilemma – to call it ‘diabolical’
would be an obvious pun in this context – constitutes one of the most fundamental ‘deep structures’
of Western intellectual history. Not only is it crucial to the constitution of Christian
identities since the Church Fathers, or the confessional battles unleashed by the Reformation
in its battle with the Church of Rome; but, through the mediation of 17th-century Protestant
polemicists (the so-called anti-apologists, see below), even the rhetorical construction
and establishment of Enlightenment identities and the closely related project of disenchanting
the world through science and rationality are still variations on the very same theme.
In other words, my book is ultimately about the longue durée of a fundamental problem
(or more precisely, of attempts to respond to it) that has haunted Western culture from
the ﬁrst centuries to the present. (p. 256) [End Quote]
Now here Hanegraaff goes on a little digression, which I find very endearing, because it seems
I experienced the same story. He tells us how he got interested in this “forgotten
continent” of thought in Western culture, which nobody around him ever took seriously.
His initial curiosity began with the New Age bookshops popping up everywhere throughout
the 70s and 80s – when he came to realize that nobody (and this is an exaggeration on
his part) had taken the trouble to actually read and analyze the texts at the source of
the new age (in my opinion, to say nobody read Donnelly, Blavatsky, Aleister Crowley,
Manly P. Hall, etc. is just patently wrong – obviously the New Age had to start somewhere,
and it wasn’t on TV - but let’s move on). What I’ll give Hanegraaff is this: people
definitely had not been trying to put them within any kind of historical context. He
says that during that time, the New Age was seen as something for outsiders or the media
to poke fun at, but not as a form of popular religion that should be taken seriously in
any way. And here’s where Hanegraaff’s story is similar to mine: He simply couldn’t
understand why this was the case – it was not that he was in any way impressed by New
Age ideas – it was moreso that he’d found the theological underpinnings of his own Protestant
up bringing at least as bizarre. He writes: I had been told that God has fathered a son
(without a mother in sight, but with the help of a virgin), who then proceeded to save humanity
by dying on a cross and rising up to heaven. None of that made any sense to me. Why, I
asked myself, would such a wildly improbable story be considered more ‘serious’ and
‘respectable’ than other admittedly far-out ideas, involving such things as reincarnation,
channelled entities, or ascended masters? All of it was pretty strange, to be quite
honest. I saw the taken-for-granted distinctions between ‘serious’ and ‘non-serious’
religion as simple prejudice, and I still do. Now, these early conclusions of mine could
have made me into a sceptic debunker, but instead they turned me into a scholar of religion.
I might not share these beliefs, but I have never (well…almost never) felt an impulse
to ridicule the more dismiss them as non-sense, perhaps because the question of their ultimate
truth did not strike me as particularly interesting. Rather, they fascinated me as creative products
of the religious imagination, and I genuinely wanted to understand why people would come
to hold such interesting beliefs. [end quote] It’s for this reason that I even started
the Encyclopedia Hermetica myself, and doubtless Hanegraaff started out on his journey to get
a finger on the history of the New Age… and let’s just say the New Age was merely
the very tip of an extremely deep iceberg. What he ultimately found while scratching
away at the New Age was that it was but the latest effervescence, bubbling out from Western
Esotericism’s long history. Now different scholars had different perspectives when approaching
the topic, along a spectrum from strongly ‘realist’ to strongly ‘nominalist’
approaches. The Realists suggested that Western esotericism was actually a real historical
tradition that actually existed ‘out there’ in consensus reality, just waiting for us
to discover and study it… the Nominalist position, on the other hand, rejects all Universals
in favour of particulars – in other words ‘Western esotericism’ is just a theoretical
construct in the mind of scholars, and we’re merely ordering the world by naming it even
though our signiﬁers have no intrinsic connection to the things they signify… Now trying to
get himself out of these two extremes, in good Hermetic fashion, Hanegraaff’s strategy
has been to go to the sources and let them speak for themselves, rather than forcing
them to say what he wants them to say through the lens of theory. In writing about “Western
esotericism” he was really trying to write a history of how scholars and intellectuals
have imagined it, and why, and of course we’re all very happy that he did so . (p. 258-259)
Alright, well that’s as far as I’m willing to go. Thanks for joining me, I hope this
has been somewhat useful to you in your studies of Hermeticism, Esotericism, the Occult, or
whatever – I would encourage you to look at the bibliography in the notes, and if you
can, to do some of the reading yourself because, naturally, I can’t just reproduce all the
arguments here, and many of them are quite sophisticated, so I didn’t want to run the
risk of compressing them to the point of ironing out the complexities and creating strawmen.
Now for those of you thirsty for more Hanegraaff, I think some of you who hang out around here
would get a real kick out of his talk here on YouTube entitled “Entheogenic Esotericism”
where he goes into some detail about the unsung historical impact of Terence McKenna! It’s
a gem, I promise. And if for some reason you happen to BE Wouter Hanegraaff and you’re
listening to this, please don’t hesitate to contact me, as I would love to chat with
you – particularly in regards to hashing out how the Picatrix fits into the story of
“Platonic Orientalism” – if you ever wanted to come on and have a chat, I’ll
leave an open invitation for you. Good day to one and all, and thanks for listening!
I&amp;#39;m Dan Attrell 