Encyclopedia Hermetica: A Big History (Part
31) - Aum Intro
Alright, so today I would like to do a little retrospection on the centuries leading up
to where we’re currently at in our chronology, and that’s to take some time and talk about
quote-unquote “Asiatic religion”, which we have covered a little bit of, especially
in regards to Zoroastrianism, Buddhism, and Hinduism, but obviously this is a massive
subject, and Asia is home to a countless number of traditions (which today in the angloid
world we very conveniently have monolithic names with which to paint ourselves some epistemological
cartoons of reality). We tend to simplify things with words and lose sight of reality
when we say “oh they’re Shinto”, they’re “Hindu” or “they’re Daoists.” And
I want to explore this oversight for a minute. Just as it was in the quote-unquote “west”
throughout antiquity, syncretism has always been a strong component of oriental religions.
“Hinduism” emerged from and ultimately meshed well with animism and shamanism; Buddhism
emerged from Hinduism and ultimately meshed well with Daoism, Confucianism, and so forth…
To talk about confessional lines, about who believed in what creed or what dogma, is really
to misunderstand the organic nature of ancient religion. When you do that, you’re imposing
your own categories on the past based on our present situation – our present “logogram”
(as Robert Anton Wilson would have called it).
Today we have this notion that one has to be part of one, singular, exclusive, endogamous
(and monotonous) belief system in order to consider oneself quote-unquote “part of
a religion.” You can’t be a real Christian today in most people’s eyes, if you don’t
go to church and happen to also consider the writings of the Zoroaster sacred. You can’t
be a real Jew if you didn’t have a Bar Mitzvah and you also happen to keep an idol in your
closet. No, no, this would not look good on tax forms and government issued censuses.
You could, however, in 3rd century China (for example) be a Buddhist monk, a Confucian scholar,
and a Daoist poet all at once. There’s plenty of overlap between these systems, and folks
back then were more likely to focus on the things that all these loosely defined systems
had in common rather than hair-split over differences.
Systematization, categorization, taxonomy – all these things are a Western disease,
and they were brought down on Asian religion during the colonial period, essentially “fabricating”
rigid systems overnight, then peddling them in the West as discrete and cohesive religions.
This is what is meant when people say the West “invented” Hinduism, or something
along those lines. Obviously it’s not meant to say that they invented that infinitude
of local gods, traditions, practices, etc. – it’s that they invented the labels – they
cut up the territory into maps - and then in turn those discrete labels came back to
influence how people (both in the West and the East) conceived of their own religions.
In a way, as a Westerner, it’s not a crazy stretch to say that Herman Hesse played a
larger part in creating the Buddhism I understand than the writings of some contemporary disciple
of the Buddha. So… what I’m trying to say before getting
into this stuff any further, is that our rigid categories – words like “Buddhism”,
“Hinduism”, “Vedic religion”, etc. - these can only help to provide approximations
of these quote-unquote ‘systems’ in people’s minds. I even hesitate to say “systems”
because that implies they are closed off, isolated, and self-sustaining... they are
not, and never were. No religion is nor ever was.
We’ve got to stop thinking of religions as rigid models here, and start thinking of
them as living intellectual ecosystems, all interconnected with one another. Think of
fields, and woods, and swamps, and hills, and then all the various creatures which inhabit
them. Some creatures use all these ecosystems, others prefer one or two, but there were no
fences put up to isolate the creatures of the land.
Now the reason we’re going to talk about some these loosely defined groups today is
because I’ve sort of neglected them and we’ve just come to a point in our chronology
where ‘east’ and ‘west’ have gotten hitched. I’m going to discuss how Alexander
opened up the way through conquest; how he Hellenized the middle-east and even parts
of India; and how this allowed for an opening up of trade routes – and with the exchange
of goods comes always the exchange of ideas. If you read a hermetic grimoire like the Picatrix,
which of course wouldn’t be composed for over another millennium, you’d notice that
the Chaldeans, the Nabataeans, the Arabs, and the Indians (…especially the Indians)
all play a crucial role in the formulation of quote-unquote “magical thinking” – just
as much as do the thoughts of Plato, Aristotle, and Pythagoras.
So – without making the mistake of assuming a continent like India exists in a vacuum,
exists as a monolith, or exists purely in so far as it influenced the West – let’s
dive into some Indian religions. Now, let it be known that when we’re talking
about India in a historical sense, this label comprises everything now part of the modern
states of Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nepal, Bhutan, Sri Lanka, India, and even Tibet. I don’t
want to have to hear any nationalists’ grumbling about the nitty-gritty details of who came
from where, what country invented what, or any such nonsense. All these states are modern
creations, and for the most part they are made up of arbitrary lines drawn in the sands
by some sorcerous colonialists some two to three centuries ago.
In any case – both the northernmost part of India and its southernmost part (Tibet
and Sri Lanka) are predominantly Buddhist. In fact, most of the subcontinent at one point
was Buddhist (around the time of King Asoka – who I’ll discuss), but as the centuries
went on, India was mostly divided between both Islam and so-called “Hinduism” (which,
for a lack of a better way to explain it, is roughly equivalent to that grassroots level
Greco-Roman paganism – it’s a sort of infinite pastiche of local traditions). And
now something to keep in mind is that, over the centuries, this diversity in Hinduism
was made even stronger purely because India was so rarely unified under the rule of one
single major empire. For most of its history, India was fragmented into all sorts of little
states, tribal enclaves, chiefdoms, and so forth. Moreover, an added variable for generating
diversity was the number of languages in the region – there were a handful of Indo-European
languages in the North, and a bunch of Dravidian ones in the south. There have always been
vast geographical and climatological differences across India, and even these have affected
the diversity of religion from one region to the next.
You can probably start to see why the idea of something called “Hinduism” is somewhat
misleading. That huge assortment of myths, literature, rituals, gods, philosophies, practices,
movements, aesthetic sensibilities, styles of music, etc. can only be so loosely defined
before the definition has no value. I for one don’t have a problem ditching the term
altogether, but I don’t think we’ll be getting into so much detail today so as to
need to ditch it. To paraphrase the words of Ninian Smart (from whom I’ve gathered
lots of information in putting together this lecture): “Hinduism today is now much more
like the trunk of a single mighty tree; but its past is a tangle of most divergent roots.”
Now… in previous lectures we’ve gone (in passing) over the so-called ‘Vedic culture’,
whose dates are roughly between the years 3,000 and 1,000 BC. We’ve also been talking
a lot about the axial age (especially in regards to Gautama Buddha), and this loosely defined
period coincides with what we might call the “pre-classical” period of Indian history
(running from about 1000BC to 100AD). During this time we have the founding of Buddhism,
the birth of Jainism (from the teachings of Mahaira), the composition of the Upanishads,
and the proliferation of Brahmanism (which was the chief vehicle for the spread of Sanskrit
across the whole of India). But even in Buddhist circles, where people rejected the authority
of the Vedic Brahmins, the language used in the composition of all their sacred texts
and commentaries would be in the language of the Aryan invaders: Sanskrit. In Sri Lanka,
Buddhist texts would be written in Pali and in Tibet, they were written in Tibetan. These
three literary languages are essentially our chief markers for distinguishing Indian traditions
from one another, and that’s a not-so-artificial boundary to keep in mind amidst all this variability. Some Commonalities
OK, so – we know there are an infinite number of forms of religious expression as far as
India is concerned, but then more importantly: what are some points of commonality? What
do all Indians have in common in regards to religion? Let’s look at this…
On the ritual and practical dimension, its these three elements which seem nearly universal:
yoga (or “self-discipline” if you will), puja (i.e. worship), and last but not least:
sacrifice. Yoga is a truly ancient practice, and I would
argue is as old as language itself. As soon as language became a thing, I like to imagine
yoga became a thing. It means ‘union’ – and it’s all about dispelling the illusion
of selfhood – a very persistent illusion, which is entirely the by-product of language.
Alternatively, yoga may also have been a later by-product of decadent shamanism.
What I mean by this is that shaman traditionally accessed the divine by means of sacred plants.
Over centuries and millennia, however, they either occulted or drove their sacraments
to extinction, and this led them subsequently to develop all manner of yogic techniques
to quote-unquote “get there on the natch”. So to fill the void where psychedelics dropped
out (the theory goes), yogic techniques were invented to emulate those states. Obviously
this too is an oversimplification, but it’s definitely one possibility (and I’m well
aware that the old-school view is very much in disagreement with this – they like to
see plant-wielding shamanism as ‘decadent shamanism’ rather than the other way around…
to me this view is silly, but whatever.) In any case, for the sake of ease, let’s
say that traditional yoga is an inward search and a commitment to self-discipline, particularly
in the mental sphere, but so too in the bodily sphere (which of course, interpenetrate one
another as categories, if they can even be said to exist at all – “everything is
in your head, and your head is in everything”). Now, all this recent stuff about gymnastics
(what I call Yoga Americana – to say nothing of aligning your chakras and loving your yoni)
– none of this is ancient, but it is pre-modern. They’d simply call this stuff “asana”
which is but one of the eight limbs of yoga, and truth be told, it’s not even one of
the more important limbs. Asana means “postures” and the idea is: if you can tolerate the boredom
and pain of holding a pose for an exceedingly long amount of time, then you might be able
to move on to sitting zazen and meditating for hours on end without going nuts. If you
can handle pain, you can handle distraction, the reasoning goes.
Anyhow, this isn’t the place to get into yoga – I recommend Aleister Crowley’s
Eight Lectures on Yoga if you want a good Western interpretation of what yoga really
is (otherwise, just go read Patanjali). Alright, so if yoga (or union) is all about
liberation – all about giving up the ghost and pouring out the illusory self or ego into
that Great Oneness of Brahma – a kind of flight from the alone to the alone – then
puja (or worship) is the opposite. It’s focused on the I-Thou construct, and it’s
primarily communal and public. This is where gods like Vishnu and Shiva come into play,
and these are obviously but two among millions (330 million to use the traditional number).
For Buddhists in India, puja began with simple rituals by which Gautama Buddha might be remembered
– but over the centuries the influence of Mahayana Buddhism developed a sort of devotion
or bhakti which basically conceived of the Buddha as a sort of god.
This Bhakti, or path of devotion, is especially prominent in that great samvada called the
Bhagavad Gita – the song of god – the most famous section of the Mahabharata, one
of Hinduism’s most sacred texts, written sometime between the 2nd century BC and 2nd
century AD. What we know for sure is that the Bhagavad Gita makes references to many
other spiritual paths and so reflects a milieu where Brahmins, Buddhists, Sramanas and Jains
were all competing for adherents – it emerged from the whirlpool of all these great traditions,
and in it, this path of Bhakti is what Krishna urges Arjuna to follow after unveiling himself
in his great theophany, and even before then in verse 4.9 where he declares that those
truly devoted to God or the gods are not reborn, but go straight to them (which in my mind
is just another rebirth, but what do I know?). And of course, just like in Greco-Roman paganism,
there’s always a sort of ‘Do ut Des’ relationship – I give so that you might
give – a sense of mutual devotion between the god and his adherents… which brings
me to my next point… sacrifice. Now, with respects to sacrifice – we need
to remember that this notion of ‘Brahmin’ or priestly caste came into India from the
Indo-European north. Greeks, Celts, Scandinavians, Romans, Persians, and many Indians are all
tied together by their common ancestry. Along with this shared ancestry came shared values,
traditions, and practices, and one of the most universally attested of these, is sacrifice,
a communal act of ritualized murder (of “doing the deed”). It’s interesting to note that
there are no temples in the Vedas – and this is because these were a later development
by the Brahmin class, who were chiefly valued as experts in sacrifice and ritual. Once temples
began to be built, these acted as houses for the gods, where their rituals and sacrifices
might take place – these were not churches in the way we understand them now. Now let’s
remember within this context that both Buddhism and Jainism are essentially rejections of
the Brahmin belief systems, and thus they both rejected the notion of animal sacrifice.
They did however practice a form of renunciation which I suppose modern day evangelicals would
consider sacrifice (in the same way they consider tithing a sacrifice; that is, giving up something
you like in order to weaken its hold on you). This is not what sacrifice meant to the ancients
– all this is purely a modern ideal. Sacrifice in the ancient world was moreso about communal
bonding than chipping away at greed or gilding church icons. For this reason, Jain and Buddhist
sacrifices (or acts of renunciation) were largely confined to offerings of plants and
butter. So… moving on… there’s this interesting
polarity at work in Indian religion which arose between the two concepts of ‘tapas’
and ‘tantra.’ Tapas literally means ‘heat’, and that’s in reference to the ‘heat’
that is generated in the body by self-mortification, mutilation, immolation or starvation – the
manipulation of tapas is a very important characteristic of Jainism, and is something
which Buddhism arose to combat. Buddhism is all about the middle-path, not extremes. Now
‘tantra’, on the other hand, which basically means ‘short cut’, is more ‘magickal’
and esoteric – it’s all about acquiring liberation through occult means (means which
can include everything from astrology, to extramarital sex, meat-eating, and all other
manners of taboo-violating.) This is one means through which the tantric adept proves that
he is above ordinary social mores. In the words of Crowley: “Ordinary morality is
for ordinary people.” It’s this sort of ‘transvaluation’ we see at work in the
Ptolemaic dynasty with their incestuous marriages, with the gnostic spermophages and fetophages,
or with the worshippers of Kali who hang out in cremation grounds – it’s all about
this idea that extra-ordinary morality is for extra-ordinary people. So… yeh - as
we can see – even in regards to the points of commonality, we see a tension at work between
various traditions. At least we can say, however, that in all
Indian religions, there prevailed a strong belief in cyclical time, coupled with the
notion that things typically got worse as these cycles went on. Doubtless this belief
emerged from the fact that the Indians were master astrologers from a very early period.
As I’ve discussed in a previous lecture, the present age is called the Kaliyuga – a
time of ever increasing chaos and evil, leading toward dissolution and renewal. Time in India
was conceived not merely as cyclical, but eternal. The wheel of life just turns, turns,
turns, and the only way off is through Nirvana – extinction – the final blowing out of
life’s candle for those so weary of the world they’ve given up all desire and thus
ceased the process of metempsychosis. In the Jain tradition, this is called ‘kevala’,
and it roughly translates to “isolation”. This is not union with god, as the mystical
experience is often conceived of in the West (in fact, a true Buddhist would consider the
mystical experience just another part of Maya that must also be pierced through). Liberation
is not communion with God – it’s more like a joyous cosmic suicide – a hop, skip
and a jump off the endless wheel of suffering. So there are a number of other dominant opinions
pertinent to pre-classical and classical Indian culture – and among these we can count the
certainty in reincarnation or metempsychosis, the possibility of liberation, and the idea
of a endlessly creative God who is both entirely personal and impersonal.
Now… how people actually act in accordance with these three things, how their ethics
played out; let’s talk about this. For Jains and Buddhists, there’s a great deal of overlap.
Much emphasis is placed on reducing or altogether eliminating harm to all living beings – and
it was actually the influence from these religions which convinced most of India to become vegetarian
(and not just out of necessity either – since it also became a form of aestheticism for
many Brahmin). In the Vedic period, if you were a vegetarian, it was probably because
you didn’t have access to meat, not because you had any moral qualms. This tendency toward
respecting the sanctity of all forms of life has become a sine qua non of Indian religion.
To make another blanket statement: another commonality throughout much of India has been
a tendency toward the ideals of aestheticism, of good works, and of situational relativity
(the sense that much about a person’s spirituality depends on a person’s lot and status in
life). This is where the effects of the caste system introduced to India around 1500 BC
by Indo-European invaders comes into play. In India, like in much of the Indo-European
world, society was divided into into three categories: priests (or Brahmin), warriors
(Ksatriyas), and artisans (Vaisyas) – later, after conquering numerous groups of indigenous
peoples, they added a fourth class of people called the Sudras (who were essentially the
working poor). Eventually, a fifth class was added: the infamously labelled ‘Untouchables’
who were thought to be so base that they would fuck up a Brahmin’s purity if they ever
came in contact. Sometimes these classes are called “colours” and there’s a definite
racial undertone to its sense. The Sanskrit-speaking Veda-reciting Indo-Europeans (or so-called
Aryans) subjugated India and set this system into play, so obviously they put themselves
at the top, and its remained that way up until today. Buddhism and Jainism, of course, didn’t
recognize these categories: as far as they were concerned, We’re all human, and every
last one of us is doomed to endless suffering until we achieve enlightenment, regardless
of our status or ancestry. Distinctions such as class or race were (and
are) explicitly banned from the Sangha (which is the word for the Buddhist monastic order
of vow-taking monks). The ascetic traditions prevalent throughout India were reformed,
re-envisioned and revitalized in this pre-classical period by Gautama Buddha and Mahavira; but
they didn’t convince everyone with their ways. As in Greece at the time, there were
itinerant teachers with all manner of positions which challenged the minutia of Buddhism,
Jainism and Hinduism – there were even materialists! And these men, like materialists today, rejected
all notions of transcendence, spiritual powers, and aspirations to holiness. Fundamentally,
these were skeptics – and yes, they existed in India too – whether they got these ideas
from Greece – I don’t know – part of me thinks it’s racist to assume Indians
couldn’t figure out scepticism on their own, and then part of me thinks I have a tendency
to underplay the influence Greece had on India. It’s a real ‘Scylla and Charybdis’ type
of scenario… In any case, some of these wandering ascetics
(not necessarily the materialist ones – but the ones who were ultimately not Brahmin),
these were sometimes called Sramana (and this is actually where all the Central Asian variants
of the word Shaman comes from – I talk about this briefly in my book). Whereas Brahmin
were exalted priestly figures responsible for all manner of rituals and social functions,
the Sramana had basically turned on, tuned in and dropped out. They just straight up
didn’t give a shit – the rules just didn’t apply to them because they saw through the
scam that is civilization. They didn’t care for bathing, wearing clothes, finding lodging
or food – to say nothing of performing elaborate rituals or memorizing scripture. Some of these
types wound up conceiving of stuff like breatharianism (which in its pathological sense is called
inedia, or anorexia nervosa – but these are modern categories). Breatharians basically
claim to live purely off of prana (which is breath or spirit), but is also sometimes conceived
of as light or some sort of abstract life-force. I’m not really convinced, but hey – I’ve
seen some weird shit in my life. Others of this type would just lay around and smoke
charas all day, which is a strange noxious mixture of cannabis, tree resins, datura,
and god knows what else. In Greek, these guys are sometimes called sarmanoi, and in other
cases “gymnosophists” (naked sages) – and in any case, these aren’t strict categories.
They all remind me a bit of Diogenes. I like to think how some must have been very sophisticated
thinkers, while others might just have been old fools totally down on their luck, and
there’d be really no way to distinguish them from one another until you sat at their
feet and got to know them. ***As for the Brahmin: these men were believed
to have tapped into a tradition which stretched back into mythical time, to an age of the
seers who had first heard the sacred sound of the cosmos and from them coaxed out that
great authoritative collection of hymns known as the Vedas (so if we ever want to talk about
quote-unquote Hindu Orthodoxy – this refers to the acceptance of the Vedas as authoritative
and divine). According to the Picatrix, the name “Brahmin” came from some guy named
Barnac Al Brahmani, but I always assumed it was etymologically linked with the word Brahma,
or God with a big G. The Brahmin were the driving force of creativity
in India, so far as art, shrines, statues, temples, and all that jazz is concerned. Their
hymns take us back to an era when Aryan horse lords and chariot riders were sweeping through
the plains of Northern India. These Aryans dislodged the previous people, the Dasyus,
who were dark skinned people living in citadels involved with the worship of phallus idols,
doubtless related to some sort of fertility cult. Penis-worshipping fertility cults were
sort of ‘the thing’ back in those days before one group of folks started getting
exceptionally rowdy and proud. It was the values of these foreign men (and let’s not
kid ourselves, it was men calling all the shots in this culture) which inspired such
deities as Indra, who basically drank up lakes-worth of hallucinogenic Soma every day and fought
endless battles against demons, demigods, anti-gods, evil men and so forth. Over a quarter
of the Vedic hymns are dedicated to this war god.
Among the gods of the Vedas, there’s a definite throw-back to a warrior ethos which was very
much thriving in the Bronze Age. Varuna is another one of these gods – a cognate of
Zeus as the old Sky Father who presides in judgement over the world. Varuna, like Zeus,
was summed up in this idea of ‘rta’, the sacred pattern underlying all dimensions of
existence – what some might call Logos, the rational ordering principle of the Universe.
His partner in governance was the god Mitra, whose name literally means ‘contract’
or ‘covenant’ (to use a slightly more loaded term). I don’t want to get into too
much detail regarding specific parallels between Greek and Indian divinities, I just wanted
to point out that they’re there if you want to look into them. [Now, this is just an aside
because I’ve seen people fall into this trap: in regards to the Mitra of Vedic and
Avestan religion, this god has very, very little to do with the mystery god Mithras
who was worshipped by the Roman legions. So if you want to look into this Greco-Vedic
divine ancestry stuff yourself, don’t fall into that pitfall). An article which might
be of interest to you is called “a light from distant asterisks”: Towards a Description
of the Indo-European Religious Heritage by Peter Jackson (the linguist, not the guy who
maintains the rotation of the Earth by perennially causing Tolkien to spin in his grave).
Anyways… something worth noting along these lines is that the Vedic pantheon is not quite
as blessed as wind-swept, cloud-girt Olympus. Indra was said to have parted the earth and
skies (in a fashion similar to Saturn’s castration of Kronos) and this sets the stage
for conflict between good and evil gods. The idea in Greece was that the gods on Olympus
were deathless, ambrosial, indifferent, and unconcerned about human affairs once Zeus
had brought some semblance of order to the cosmos... Indian cosmology was far more chaotic
however. I even tend to think this was a factor which contributed to the world weariness of
those attracted to Buddhism and Jainism, since the idea was that when you die, you reincarnate,
and then it’s just more of the same… even if you ascend to godhood and go live the beatific
life in some pocket plane, you’d still wind up having to battle with great demons and
fight celestial wars. Even Gods partake in Samsara, and enlightenment or ‘isolation’
were ways of getting off the ride. Two gods I’ve said very little about, Shiva
and Vishnu – who would come into a position of much greater importance at a later date
– weren’t really all that important in pre-classical India. But this leads me to
an important point… within any given hymn or sacrifice or festival or whatever, the
god in question is in and of himself supreme. Every god (lower case g) is God (upper case
G). We might call this belief “henotheism” (or one-god-at-a-time-ism) instead of polytheism,
and this concept began at quite an early period in Indian history, only to carry on well into
our current times. So I think that’s all I want to say about
the Vedic element in Indian religion. I just want to remind everyone that although this
collection of Vedic hymns is very useful to historians, we can ultimately yield little
accurate information from them about a time before 600 BC. They are less important as
historical documents, and more important as a rudder which shaped Indian society to come.
Hinduism would ultimately develop from the collision between the Veda-chanting Brahmin
and indigenous pre-Indo-European conceptions of spirituality.
Alright, so I want to talk a bit about Buddhism for a minute – but keep in mind that the
real meat and potatoes of Buddhist history lies just outside the reach of where we’re
at chronologically. We’ve got a lot left to cover before we get into things like the
split between Mahayana and Theraveda Buddhism and so on. And of course we’ve already covered
the story of the Buddha in some detail – so here I’d like to talk more about the immediate
history of Buddhism following the death of Gautama Buddha and set the stage for Buddhism’s
ascendancy as a world religion. Buddhism’s so-called ‘classical period’ begins around
the first century AD, and it’s during this period that it spread into China, Korea, and
eventually Japan. We’ll talk more about the successive phases of Buddhism as we come
to them, but for now, let’s focus our attention on the period following that final meal of
mushrooms which destroyed the Buddha’s body and liberated him from his mortal coil.
After this fateful dinner, it would be wrong to think of him as either existing or not
existing… or both… or neither… His followers cremated his remains; his relics were carried
off to the ends of the earth. If you look at certain pieces of Buddhist art which depict
that great wheel, you’ll often see the Buddhas sitting zazen just outside of samsara (usually
in the corners of the image) where they simultaneously are and are not.
The Buddha had made no provisions for a successor during his lifetime. The new leader was to
be the Dharma itself – the teaching which he’d left behind. The Sangha, a rather loose
term for an initially very loose body of individuals, ultimately conglomerated around the Buddha’s
teachings. These individuals were typically monks, nuns, hermits, sramanas, and so forth.
Some were recluses, others were missionaries. The latter rubbed shoulders with Brahmins,
Jains, Ajivika monks, and so forth – while the hermits just did their thing. Individuals
like these throughout all of India met together to ultimately form a wide variety of small
monastic communities where they could eat and meditate together, debate matters of doctrine,
clarify their philosophical footings and so forth. It’s during this period that Buddhism
really began to take form as a ‘religion’ (a thing that binds people together), rather
than one man’s philosophy on how to escape suffering through the middle path. From this
point, it would not be long until Buddhism was taken up as a state-religion of sorts,
but first, we need to address a very important event… and that would be none other than
the coming of Alexander the Great onto the scene.
%%%Alexander in India So, after Alexander had conquered Achaemenid
Persia and parts of Afghanistan, the Greek King (and now Persian Sharasha) moved his
eyes toward India, which was really nothing less than some sort of mythical Atlantean
kingdom as far as he was concerned. In 326, Alexander fought at the Battle of Hydaspes
with the Indian King Porus, and there he gained a great deal of respect as a military leader.
Not long after this victory, however, Alexander was finally persuaded by his troops to return
home rather than to march further into the interiors of the Indian sub-continent and
face its harsh climate. This battle around the Jhelum river against King Porus is considered
by many to be the most costly battle that the armies of Alexander had up to date fought,
and it seemed his men had had enough. The truth is, they were scarred shitless to face
more Indian armies. Despite being wounded himself on campaign, Alexander had wanted
to subjugate the entire known world (which was presumed to end with India), but obviously
this was too much to ask for. So, despite his relatively brief stay in India, Alexander
had opened up the whole land for the arrival of Hellenism, and this collision of two such
magnificent cultures would yield fascinating results.
This Hellenism would first be felt in the realm of politics. When Alexander withdrew
from India, he left his conquered Indian territories to the control of some of his generals – and
this decision is what ultimately paved the way for the rise of the famous Maurya dynasty
who would be so pivotal in the history of Buddhism as a world religion. While returning
westward and even considering the conquests of both Carthage and Rome, Alexander died
in Babylon in June of 323 BC. Two years after Alexander&amp;#39;s death, one young ambitious man
by the name of Chandragupta Maurya would liberate India’s North-Western frontier from Greek
control and found himself a dynasty, in whose ranks stood some of India’s greatest kings
of all time: Chandragupta himself, Bindusara, and the famed Buddhist ruler, Emperor Ashoka.
All three of these kings maintained intimate relationship with the Hellenistic kingdoms.
In fact, Chandragupta even wound up marrying the daughter of Seleucus Nikator, the Greek
successor king over Syria and former General of Alexander’s army. This relationship was
further reinforced during the reign of Bindusara, wherein we have records that King Antiochus
was urged to send Greek wine and raisins which had come into great demand in India – so
we know there was a whole bunch of trading going on during the Hellenistic period. And
we should all know by this point that –like I said earlier – wherever material goods
flow, so too do ideas. The diplomatic relationship between India
and the West was recorded in one of Ashoka’s Rock Edicts (number XIII to be precise) wherein
he mentions the names of five Greek rulers to whose kingdoms Buddhist missionaries had
been sent. Even plain ol’ visitors between India and the West became more common sight.
Contact between Greeks and Indians is recorded in great detail in works like Strabo’s Geography,
Pliny’s Natural History, Arrian’s Indica, Ptolemy’s Geography, and a handful of other
classical works. There are even references to quote-unquote “conversions” of Greeks
to Hinduism (of course, this transition would have been seamless to Greek pagans – it
would have occurred through a purely natural syncretic process – it was just a matter
of taking on a number of new gods in addition to the old ones).
Perhaps a more exceptional case would concern the Greek King of Bactria, Menander (or Melinda)
– Chandragupta’s grandson – who took up Buddhism and wrote a great dialogue on
the illusion of the self. In this way, India and all of its intellectual richness had come
to occupy a peripheral, albeit important position in the Greek world (…and vice-versa, of
course). The Greeks’ influence upon the cultural life of India in the fields of art
and architecture, philosophy and science, cannot be understated. This is a really under-researched
field due to linguistic hurdles, but the influence the Greeks had upon India was enormous. I
plan to have a guest on sometime soon, Dr. Nirmal Das, to come and talk to us about it
– but for now you’ll just have to deal with my assessment.
So let’s start with art… the impact of Hellenistic art in India was tremendous, resulting
in an entirely new school of art known as the Gandhara school (named after the region
north-west of India we now call Afghanistan). This style actually originated in Bactria
and Parthia, and it was only a matter of time until local artists began to construct Buddhist
images with Greek techniques. Chiefly, this style was focused on realistic images of the
Buddha or other Bodhisattvas made of stone or stucco. You’ll often hear this referred
to as Greco-Buddhist Art. This was as much an eastward expansion of Hellenism as it was
a westward expansion of Indian civilization. As one art historian once put it: “The Gandhara
artist had the hands of a Greek and the heart of an Indian.” Highly polished images of
the Buddha were being made which had more had more in common with the Greek god Apollo
than with any Indian conception of this venerable man. Interestingly enough, these images were
seated in the typical Indian lotus posture which was actually based more on observations
of Indian ascetics rather than on any western philosophers (who were more into walking and
reclining than sitting, if we can use either a Socrates or a Diogenes as our model).
And this leads me to my next point, which concerns the collision of each culture’s
respective philosophies… and this is also where it gets really murky, because we have
no clear idea of who influenced who in regards to what. Greek mystical philosophy, as seen
in the Orphic and Pythagorean schools for example, have a great number of parallels
with Indian philosophy... but I honestly don’t know who got what from whom (and I’ve heard
countless arguments on all sides). Orientalists, nationalists, and so forth all have their
own opinions. I’ve heard it said that metempsychosis was brought into India by Greek travellers
starting from about the 8th century… You’ve probably also heard the opposite to be true
far more often (especially when it comes to Theosophical circles). The reality is, however,
that we have no way of knowing – and ultimately, it might just be that the philosophers of
both cultures independently developed their respective theories of metempsychosis. We
just don’t have the sources to make a strong argument either way.
There’s all sorts of great questions we can ask like: did Stoicism and Epicureanism
inform Buddhism, or did Buddhism inform Stoicism and Epicureanism? Or were they completely
separate developments which only converged to influence one another at a later date?
Since so much of history is retro-projection, does “at a later date” even mean anything?
(In other words, how did eventual developments in both streams reinterpret old information
in light of new information?) What about vegetarianism? The concept of the Self? Concepts like the
Parmenidean/Platonic/Neo-Platonic “One” in relation to Brahma? What about astrology?
Alchemy? The number of questions is endless, and as far as I’m concerned, there’s no
way of untangling this mess of a non-simultaneously apprehended universe. Sorry.
As far as Indian science is concerned, the Greeks radically changed India’s thoughts
concerning astronomy. Thanks to Alexander, the Greeks were the inheritors of that glorious
Babylonian, Egyptian and Persian cultural heritage, and their millennia of observations
went a long way in influencing the Indians. As far as I know, Vedic astrology was heavily
concerned with the transit of the Moon through its 27 mansions – it was far more Lunar
than it was Solar – however, the signs of zodiac, the seven day week, the concept of
‘hours’ – all of these things were brought into India by the Greeks (who themselves also
gained much from Indian observations). By the middle-ages, however, Indians took a sort
of mystical place of prominence in all matters astrological. Western Europe looked to the
Arab world for authority, and the Arab world looked to India… there was a sort of never
ending orientalism when it came to deciding who were the supreme race of astrologers.
The Picatrix is a great example of this, since it was originally written by an Arab, and
it’s brimming with references to great Indian sages who were masters of astrology, suffumigation,
image-making, and so forth. But anyhow, that’s just an aside.  
Alright so – I don’t plan on moving much further eastward from here – if we do, we’re
getting into murkier territory as far as my ability to relate anything accurate or meaningful
is concerned (and there are a number of reasons for this, both historical and linguistic).
When it comes to India, we western folk can recognize all sorts of parallels with the
traditions of our own pre-Christian ancestors – and even the language is not impenetrable
– but when it comes to China, Japan, Korea, Polynesia and so forth, I’d really be talking
about what scholars call “reception”, since everything I know about ancient China,
for example, comes from narratives and recreations made by white angloid scholars during the
19th and 20th centuries, not from Chinese people themselves (there’s just only so
many languages one can learn). I haven’t the faintest clue what primitive
religion was like in China or Japan beyond the fact that it probably had many affinities
with Central Asian shamanism (or just shamanism in general). Animism, ancestor worship, divination
through bones and hexagrams, dance, drumming, use of sacred plants… it was these sorts
of things which dominated much of East Asia until the coming of Confucianism, Buddhism,
Daoism and so forth... Now as far as the specifics of Daoism or Taoism is concerned, I’ll let
it speak for itself. Go find a copy of the Tao Te Ching and consume it... in various
translations. You can finish it in an afternoon, or read it piece by piece, it doesn’t matter
- but I really do think it’s one of mankind’s most important texts. It is most universal
in its wisdom, which is why I don’t really even like calling Daoism a religion. Sometimes
I like to call it the revelation of Hermes Trismegistus to the Chinese, because Hermeticism
and Daoism have so much in common (albeit completely independent developments from one
another). But that is neither here nor there since my project is admittedly Eurocentric
in nature (it can be no other way given who and what I am).
So with that said, I think we’ll leave India for now, remembering that from this point
onwards in our chronology it’s officially become intertwined with the greater Mediterranean
system, and is now prone to giving and receiving influence from that particular corner of the
Earth. The Hellenistic world will be intimately bound up with India for the next few hundred
years, and the results of that bond will rub off on the Roman Empire in centuries to come.
Ultimately, Rome will be cut off from India by local uprisings in formerly Seleucid regions
in Persia, but that’s a long ways away from now, so we’ll leave it at that.
This has been the 31st instalment of Encyclopedia Hermetica; I’m Dan Attrell, and I’d like
to thank you for joining me for this rather cursory overview of pre-classical Indian civilization. 